And Franks, hopefully can promote him to a
panellist please, team,
from 8:00 till 8:10.
Just coming through now, Mr. Chair.
Thanks very much. Good morning, Stephen.
Got
it there.
Yeah, we can hear you there. We can't see you, but that's okay.
In the interest of time, we can kick in, and I know you know this
drill.
Okay.
Oh, there we go.
Thank you. The
bill is very welcome to us, and particularly its intentions,
and we endorse it. We've also had an opportunity to see
submission by Federated Farmers and Federated Mountain Clubs and
others on similar issues on the position on the implications of the
health and safety law for recreational users, and we
endorse theirs strongly.
To be helpful, I just say, looking at other submissions as well,
I'm conscious that lawyers
typically are very poor at looking at
trading off cost and benefit.
They work in a world of Rolls Royce justice, where time and
money
matters to clients, but not to them and not to the courts.
And the whole climate is of sort of performative
virtue,
and a view that it's wrong to take account of costs
when some right or some other interest is at stake.
I mention that because I think some of the submissions that you're
facing about
the risks of allowing more freedom of action
for
workers, obviously, but more importantly for us, recreational users,
are very easy to highlight.
But the costs of a change in our culture away
from a general assumption that
people can make their own decisions and take risks and
do dangerous things like climbing and mountain biking and riding
motorcycles and all these other things, they are inherently
inimical to the approach
of a law that was intended to protect workers.
And, of course, the assumption is that workers have some kind of
compulsion or coercion. They are afraid of losing
their jobs or of other adverse consequences if
they turn down risk. That is not the case.
The law does not need to think
of that for recreational users.
They take risks deliberately all the time, so that
the starting position should be a carve-out for
recreational use. And what we're concerned about is
that when the bill was last amended in this area, when the act
was last amended in this area,
and it was seen as a concession to farmers,
it wasn't done very well. My own personal experience, I've got a couple of
thousand hectares that I've let a lot of people use.
We had a farm stay operation there that helped
defray the expenses of our caretaker.
Twelve years ago, the caretaker's family, who
do work on a lot of neighboring farms, got briefings on health and
safety risk, and they stopped. They weren't willing to
continue to operate. They just could not be reassured
that they weren't facing crippling liabilities for
foolish acts by people coming onto the farm. And I hate that.
I'd love to be able to be generous with that land.
So we looked at the bill.
I think the primary thing is to make sure that Section
doesn't undermine the effect of the exceptions intended in
37. Section 36
wasn't changed and should have been when Section 37 had the
farmland or the farm hazard exception.
Another primary recommendation is that
for recreational users, there'd be a
defense of reasonableness.
Essentially, a defense that if this is a risk I would
willingly take ex ante, I should be allowed to take it,
and that it isn't the same situation as, for example,
forcing mandatory helmet wearing on a whole lot of people who probably
don't want to have to carry helmets.
But where they are employees,
for the sake of the integrity of the law,
they've made that mandatory. But for recreational users,
there are many activities which have both the
natural risks of the environment, but also risks that
could be exacerbated,
for example, by farm tracks. I use that as
an example in the submission because it was one of the things that
my
farm manager pointed to when I was trying to reassure him
that Parliament had
given them some protection. He said, "This doesn't say anything about tracks.
That's where work happens all the time.
Tracks wash out.
We have an open digging for a culvert. It might sit there for three months.
I don't want to be
fined $600,000 because I didn't put a sign by the culvert
or cover it up immediately." And we need to think about these for all of the
recreational activities.
So I don't want to use up all the time.
If people have got questions, please ask, and I hope that
our solicitorAlex Ali
Miller is also online. She's familiar with the law and would be happy
to jump in and answer any technical questions.
Great. Thank you, Stephen and Clark.
If Alex is online, please put her as a panelist.
Any questions for Stephen?
Stephen, one of the points you've touched on is this challenge with the
culture that we are
seeing of businesses managing to the
letter of the law that's been raised in a number of the submissions, and a
concern that changing the act will
encourage people even further to manage to the letter of the law, but not actually
achieve
appropriate health and safety outcomes.
Have you got a comment on how we can strike that balance without leaving
the lawyers in the middle of it too much?
I think the biggest change, always the law is what is
enforced and how it's enforced. And
if you had a defense
that allowed you to
ask the court to consider what a person
in the shoes of the parties at the relevant
time would choose to do, that
would go a long way to getting away from the technicality of
compliance.
And there's an awful lot of performative compliance checklists and
notices galore, and it's the
same thing as the cone culture,
the
road cone culture that's dominated New Zealand. It's all performative.
And if there was a defense that said,
if we considered but decided it was reasonable
for people to be expected to move past this
obstruction
without being guided by cones,
because there's only five vehicle movements a day
on that road,
and it doesn't need a stop-go man at each end of the excavation.
I'm talking here of personal experience.
We've got five-
Mm
... kilometers of public road, we're the only users.
And now when they have to mend it or clear a drain,
they have five people involved, whereas,
10 years ago there was one with a digger.
And that was rational because the likelihood of someone coming upon
that
machine a- and, being injured was very low.
It's quite rational to say you do not need the entire
cabal of
basically back protection. So I would say the biggest
change would be by creating a defense
that enabled the calculation of risk against
cost
and considering it in relation to other risks.
There are thousands of deliberate crimes,
we've got an enormous amount of
legal talent gets drawn into
telling people how to cover their backs against risks that are
truly remote and are a simple reasonableness decision
that took account of cost and benefits would go a long way.
Thanks very much, Stephen. I think that that's all we've got time for this morning.
Thanks, Ali, for joining as well,
and I'm sure you'll continue to track progress of the bill.
Thank you, Kyle.
Members, we are now moving to the submission by Young
Workers Resource Center,
and so if we can bring them up to the...
And Matariki is
presenting on behalf. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, Matariki.
Over to you.
Kia ora tatou. Ko Matariki Roche toku ingoa.
He kaimahi au ki Te Whare Kai Mahi Rangatahi. I'm Matariki.
I'm the comms and engagement coordinator at the Young Workers Resource
Center.
For any of you who haven't heard about our mahi, we have
two kind of main streams of mahi. One is going out into
high schools and community groups and teaching young peoples about their
rights at work,
hopefully before they have a negative experience in the workplace.
And then the other arm of our mahi is our help center, where
we provide advice, guidance, representation,
advocacy to ununionized young workers who are needing support.
So through both arms of these mahi, we talk a lot about health and
safety, and we educate and support young people
in their health and safety concerns.
Yeah, so in our written submission, I won't
reiterate it too much, but essentially we thoroughly
oppose this bill.
We have deep concerns about how this is going to impact young workers,
and we foresee that if this bill passes, young workers will
be less safe in the workplace.
We are particularly concerned at the
reduction of responsibilities for employers with less than
20 workers. Young workers are
over-represented,
or more likely to be in these small businesses.
And we're particularly concerned about the implications on
trainings.
For young workers,
people don't just learn how to be,
are born rather, with the knowledge of how to be
healthy and safe at work. They need to be taught it.
And then on top of that, we're also particularly concerned
about how these changes essentially
remove obligations for employers to care or do
anything about psychosocial harm,
which is of the most concern to young workers.
Those psychosocial harms are the ones that are
constantly raised to us.So I
wanted to put a bit of a
story and some real people behind those words that we've said
in our written submissions, and I wanted to share with you today a story
of a young worker,
who for the purpose of this submission, I will call Chris.
They have been anonymized though.
This young worker came through to us within the last 12
months.
He worked in a business with less than 20 employees,
aged between 21 to 26,
and in the industry of retail.
Chris came to us absolutely exhausted.
He had tried to raise health and safety concerns with his
employer on multiple occasions, both formally and informally,
and all of these attempts to raise concerns were ignored.
Chris had been recently made a supervisor, but he hadn't been given any
training or support for how to look after the people he was
supervising and the training he needed to be safe in that role.
He was also expected to do both his new role and his old role without
having any increase of hours.
There was an understaffing issue kind of rife throughout the workplace, and
he was really noticing in the supervisor role that there was an increase of
minor injuries, largely due to fatigue and burnout and
juggling all of these multiple jobs.
There was also some machinery health and safety concerns that he had that he
raised, and again, these were
completely ignored. And when it finally reached the point that it was then
impacting his mental health, he took it further to his employer, and
his employer's response was to laugh in his face.
These are the words that Chris wrote to us when he
first got in contact with us. He said, "I'm dealing with a
workplace issue. I raised concerns about understaffing and needing more support.
When it finally started affecting my mental health, I then raised the issue more
seriously and formally. I was direct but professional and
respectful, but I feel as though this has been unhelpful and my employer is now
engaging in bad faith. It's really affecting my mental health, but I
also feel strongly that people can't be treated like this, and I'm unsure of
what to do. It's left me feeling really unconfident.
I feel exhausted because all I want was an acknowledgment that the issues I
raised were not nothing. I really want some help with my options."
As you can hear in that, he's just exhausted.
He's tried everything he can to get these health and safety concerns that are
completely valid to be heard. So we supported Chris
in raising a personal grievance that was successful, and the
success of this PG largely relied upon the current act, the Health and
Safety at Work 2015 Act.
It was really integral to help
explain to the employer why he needed to listen to this.
And honestly, the employer's attitude kind of
aligned with a lot of the attitude of the current bill, which was that...
Oh, sorry, of the proposed bill rather, which was that if it wasn't a
critical risk, if it wasn't life or death, then the health and safety risk didn't
matter. However, what Chris was saying was actually that it
should matter because they were having real-life implications
to the workplace.
Through this process, and because of the current act, the 2015 Health and
Safety Act, we were able to have discussions with the employer, and through those
discussions, the employer was able to understand that
the
concerns raised by this young worker were indeed valid
concerns.
That health and safety risks that can seem minor can actually have
really serious harm, and that harm can be
costly and lengthy to recover from.
And that also having expectations and assumptions about a
worker's ability to protect themself in the workplace without then giving them
any support or training, in regards to those health and safety
risks is unfair and it sets the worker up for failure.
This story is really important to share with you today because it
highlights the real-life stories and
struggles that young workers, and I'm sure many other workers, are
already having when it comes to raising health and safety concerns.
And what we're really worried about is that the
proposed bill will further legitimize and
encourage employers to dismiss these concerns that are
entirely valid.
We see that young workers already struggle to raise
these health and safety concerns with their employers, and we believe that
not only
will this bill discourage young workers from
raising these concerns, but if they do raise concerns, they will no
longer have the mechanism or the legislation to fall back on to
back up their claims that these concerns are valid and needed to
be heard.
Similarly, really worried about how that's going to affect their training,
and really worried about how that's going to affect their overall
wellbeing and their lifelong
careers within the New Zealand workforce.
So yeah, kia ora. I'll leave it there if there's any couple of more minutes left
for questions.
Kia ora.
Any questions from the committee?
Phil.
Thanks, Matariki. The story of Chris was very illustrative.
You footnoted it in your submission, but I wondered if you
could flesh out what it is about young workers that
makes them more likely to
experience psychosocial harm in the workplace, because that's, I think,
kind of key to your submission, isn't it?
Thank you. Yeah.
There are a whole heap of contributing factors to why young workers are more
vulnerable to psychosocial harm.
There are a lot of assumptions about young workers.
Young workers are also frequently juggling
multiple responsibilities, whether that's study, as well as taking care of
family, as well as, they tend to be in that part-time
work, which also means they're juggling multiple
psychosocial factors.
Yeah. There's also,
I don't know, there's a really big kind of assumption and
stereotyping that happens with young workers that
also kind of has this compounding effect where young
workers are seen to be snowflakes or they're seen to
be not hard enough for the workplace, and
so
we will often minimize the
sharing of the harm that we are experiencing, and then that
compounds over time.
Yeah.
Great. Thank you very much, Matariki, for your presentation
at the hearing this morning. That's all we've got time for, but I'm sure you'll
continue to follow progress of this bill.
Thank you.
Members, we're now moving to our next submission from
Business
New Zealand, and I think we've got Catherine Rich online for
that. Good morning, Catherine.
Good morning. I'm just wondering how I get the camera
start.
No worries. We'll give you a moment. There we go.
No.
Move it.
We have
10 minutes with you this morning.
So that includes any time for questions. Over to you.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Members of the committee, thanks for the opportunity to appear today.
May I introduce Catherine Beard. She's Business New Zealand's Director of
Advocacy. Business New Zealand supports this bill.
Business New Zealand is the country's largest business advocacy organization,
representing businesses of all sizes across all
sectors.
In forming our position, we have drawn on nationwide
feedback from small business focus groups, which was reflected in
our report, Reducing Compliance Burden on New Zealand Small
Businesses, as well as MBIE's nationwide consultation through
its Have Your Say on Health and Safety Roadshow.
And we've also recently tested a
response with a number of small business leaders.
Health and safety in New Zealand workplaces is a core part of
our advocacy work. That is why maintaining a
strong and clear duty of care on all employers was fundamental
to our support of this bill. At its heart, this bill is about
making New Zealand's health and safety system work better in practice,
particularly for small business.
And that reflects exactly what we have heard on the ground.
We are clear at the outset, the goal is not less health and safety, it is
smarter, more proportionate health and safety.
Nothing in this bill removes the fundamental duty of
care on any business to provide a safe
workplace. That obligation remains unchanged, as it
should. What this bill does is right-size how that duty
is applied, especially for small, low-risk
businesses. Through our work, we heard consistent feedback.
The system for small businesses is too complex.
There is uncertainty about what good looks like, and there
is a real fear of getting it wrong. That fear has
consequences. Small business owners told us it leads
to over-compliance, a reliance on consultants,
and a focus on paperwork rather than real risk.
One restaurant and hospitality advocate told me that some
small cafes and restaurants can spend thousands of dollars on
consultants, only to be told coffee is hot,
knives are sharp, and to watch out for trips.
That's not improving safety. That's a system that, in some
circumstances, has become over-engineered and disconnected from
common sense. This bill introduces a
clearer focus on critical risks, the risks that can cause
serious harm. It also strengthens practical guidance through
approved codes of practice,
which will bring greater certainty, particularly for
small business. It reduces duplication across regulatory
systems and provides greater clarity around duty
and responsibilities. Business New Zealand supports all of these
changes, because risk is not evenly distributed.
A small PR firm, insurance office, or cafe does
not face the same risks as a construction site or a factory.
Treating them the same adds costs, adds confusion,
and does not improve safety outcomes.
When compliance becomes too complex, small businesses can
disengage or outsource responsibility.
Small businesses have given us feedback about generic
templates, box ticking, and systems that
exist on paper but not in practice.
That is not good health and safety.
Good safety comes from understanding your risks and managing
them, not from navigating complexity.
Small businesses are not asking for lower standards of safety.
They are asking for clarity, simplicity, and confidence
that they are meeting their obligations.
As one
business told us, "We would really benefit if you just tell us
what we need to do."They do not want to rely on a
compliance industry to interpret their obligations.
For low-risk small businesses, it makes sense to focus
on the critical risks.
It is important to emphasize high-risk sectors will continue to face
robust obligations. Critical risks for all
must be identified and managed. Worker
safety remains paramount. This reform is about
aligning effort with actual risk, not reducing
protection.
And to be clear, this is not about trivializing everyday
risks. It is about making sure the system is simple enough to be
applied effectively in real workplaces.
Across the business community, there is broad agreement on the problem,
complexity, and uncertainty. Where views might differ
is how best to solve it.
Business New Zealand's view is that this bill is the right
direction, provided it delivers clarity and
practicality for those applying it day to day.
Chair and members, this bill is a practical response to
what we have heard directly from small businesses across New
Zealand.
This bill does not lower standards, it makes them workable.
If we get this right, small businesses will spend less time on
paperwork and more time doing what matters most, keeping their people
safe and running their businesses.
Small business owners understand their responsibility to keep employees
safe. Asking small, low-risk businesses to focus
on critical risks is proportionate,
practical, and sensible.
Thank you to the committee, and we welcome your comments and questions.
Thanks very much, Catherine. First question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, good morning, Catherine. One of the issues that's come
up is, and you've mentioned it here in your submission, is where you've
got a small business operating a large business site, right, and
they're operating at potentially different levels of health and safety,
what is your suggestion then to address that?
You talk about here extra guidance may be needed.
What are you thinking of in that space?
Well, when larger businesses have a
large workplace, such as a construction site or a
factory,
they have very high standards, very high requirements, and
you agree to uphold those requirements and
fulfill health and safety responsibilities as per the
requirements of those businesses, i.e.,
the customers of the small business.
So we haven't
really seen any evidence that that would change,
because say, for example, an architect is visiting a large
construction site. They will turn up to that site, they will put their hard hat
on, they will put their boots on, they will sign in, they will often
have a safety induction. So the safety in those premises remains
the same. So, Kathryn, you might like to add.
Yeah. I think it's just we're not suggesting any
legislative tweaks. We just think it's a communication issue.
I think we have heard through
some of the feedback that there may be some confusion as to
whether the bigger company's responsible for the architect's
office, I guess. They're responsible in a low-risk
environment. If you think about it, an architect is sort of running
a paper-based business or is on computers and things.
The question is, is the big
site that has more risks, are they then responsible, do
they have any responsibility for that architect when they're working back in their
office? We would say no, but there's a bit of
confusion around that, so we just think it's a communication and a clarity
issue, and that could probably be done on websites and
things.
Thank you. Mike-
No, go on.
Sorry, Grant. Quick-
No, no. Go on
... through your time.
Go on.
Yeah. Mike Davidson, your question.
Sure. Thank you, Catherine, for your submission.
Just
wondering if your view on mental health and workplace
management is a critical risk.
Certainly, it is something that all employers are
aware of.
Look, it could be
if mental health does develop in a workplace, these are issues of
management and good leadership.
Certainly, within a workplace, these are things that employers do consider,
and they will work extremely hard to provide safe
workplaces for all aspects of safety.
In terms of managing the critical risks, though, for small businesses such
as cafes,
small retail shops, et cetera,
these are issues that good managers are very aware of, so
issues of
mental health, stress, et cetera.
Look, thank you, Catherine. I think that's all we've got time for this morning.
Bill, I'll give you the first question in the next round.
If we can
move to Gregory
Lowney,
and we'll see you again, I'm sure, Catherine. Thank you.
While we're waiting for Gregory to come up, just to confirm for the
committee's minutes,
that from 11:00 a.m., by agreement of the
committee, Phil Twyford will chair the committee through the end of
the meeting.
Morning, Gregory.
Morning.
We have five minutes with you this morning, including any time for questions.
I'll hand over to you
Thank you. Good morning,
and thank you, Mr. Chair and members of the committee.
My name is Gregory Ioane, and I'm speaking from a frontline
security perspective.
I support this
bill in principle. Moving toward clearer rules, less
unnecessary compliance,
and a stronger focus on serious harm is the
right direction.
But my main message is simple.
For the security sector, we must make sure
that focusing on critical risk does not
overlook the most common risk
we face, which is violence.
In this job, violence is not rare.
It's not theoretical. It's something security deal with regularly.
Security officers work every day in
supermarkets, hospitals, courts,
bars, and public spaces.
Security officers deal with theft, aggression,
intoxication, and mental health situations.
Often, security
are the first to step in when something goes wrong.
So when we talk about critical risk in this sector,
we are talking about assaults,
weapons, group violence, and workers being
left alone without support.
The idea of critical risk in this bill
is a good step,
but it only works if it is clearly understood
and applied. If there is any uncertainty,
if violence is not treated as a top risk,
then the reform risks missing what really
matters
for this workforce.
My first point is this:
violence against frontline security workers should be clearly
recognized as a critical risk.
My second point is about small businesses.
The bill reduces some requirements for smaller operators,
which can make
sense, but in this industry,
that can create problems and risks.
A lot of security work is
done by smaller companies and subcontractors.
There is a real risk that violence can become seen
as just part of the job and not properly managed.
If a guard is sent alone into a high-risk situation without good
communication, backup, or proper equipment,
that is not efficiency, it is putting them at risk of
serious harm.
So the principle must be clear.
If there is a serious risk,
it is a critical
risk no matter the size of the business.
My third point is about what good safety practice looks
like.
We already know the risks and we already know
what works to manage them. Avoiding lone
workers in high-risk situations, reliable
communication and duress systems, proper protective equipment,
clear de-escalation procedures, and good training and
supervision.
These are not-
Gregory, can I just--
Do you mind if I interrupt and just say we've read the
submission. Is there anything you want to add to the submission before I give an
opportunity for one or two questions? Otherwise, you'll run out of time.
I think we can run straight to the questions if you want the questions.
It's pretty much the same.
Yeah, it might just be a more valuable way of, yeah, of getting some-
Indeed
... insight for the team.
Phil, did you have a question on this one?
Sure. Thanks, Chair. Gregory, thanks for the submission.
I think the issue about the risk of violence for people in the
security
industry is extremely important.
What's your reading of the bill
as it stands, and whether or not that risk of violence is
brought under the umbrella of critical risk?
Sorry, Honorable Phil Twyford. Can you re-ask me the question
again?
Yeah. Is it your understanding that the risk of violence
faced by people in the security industry is covered under the
definition of critical risk in the bill?
I think that it is covered,
but it's only covered if it's managed properly.
Yeah. Okay.
And we've got the resources, and we have the resources.
Currently,
Phil, we haven't got the resources.
Mm.
It's the resources. We're undertrained.
Yep.
This industry's outdated. I mean, we just look at the consist-- I mean,
just last year we had a fatality in this industry.
Mm.
I mean,
in the same year, we had another female staff-- I mean, it's just at
Countdown. I mean, they're just walking out of the store with these goods, and
it's crime on one hand, and then we're
trained to intervene and just do the right thing.
I mean, they just turn around and assault us.
I mean, it's just-
Mm. Yeah.
Can I ask a follow-up, Chair?
Yeah. Thanks, Phil. Yeah. We'll give you a quick follow-up. Yeah.
So, as you've noticed, as you've said in your submission, Gregory, the
bill basically exempts small businesses under 20
employees from having to be responsible for managing the health and safety
risks associated with the sort of psychosocial.
And yet we know for a lot of security people, stress
caused by the
work is a major factor for people.
Do you not think that the majority of security industries who
are small SMEs, small businesses under 20 employees,
do you not think they should be covered by those psychosocial risks?
No, I think they should be covered by those psychosocial risks.
You do?
I do.
Yeah. Okay.
Look, Gregory, thank you very much for your submission this morning.
Okay.
You've made some really important points for us, and
your submission and the way you tied it to the values of a particular
party to make us think about the questions was, I thought, very clever.
So well done.
Thank you.
Thanks very much for your submission this morning. No worries.
We're now going to invite Horticulture New Zealand for 10
minutes, including time for questions.
We've got Sarah Cameron and Kate. Morning, Sarah.
Hi. Good morning, everybody, and thank you for the opportunity presented
today. My name is Sarah Cameron, and I lead the policy
work on health and safety matters at HortNZ.
With me is Kate Truffitt, who is the chief executive of
Potatoes New Zealand. Kate has previously chaired the Kiwi Fruit Industry
Health and Safety Committee and the HortNZ Health and Safety
Council, and I have sat on be- both of those with her.
We have taken our submission as read and are generally supportive of the
proposed changes. However, one of our key points is that we
consider greater clarity is needed on how the definition of
a small PCBU applies where multiple
PCBU's operate at the same workplace, such as where
growers engage contractors or labor hire companies.
I'm just going to hand over to Kate now, who will quickly talk more
about this, and then we can move on to questions. Thank you.
Kate.
Good morning. I just wanted to talk you through a couple of examples
to make this more real. So farms and orchards can have a lot of
different workers on them, and these workers can have lots of different
duties, so mixed duties, but they also can be employed by
different PCBUs. So we're concerned
that there's not enough maybe clarity within the
legislation on the application of a small
PCBU and how these can work together.
We're leaning a lot on codes of practices here,
and we have a live example at the moment where we have been
working with WorkSafe on a code of practice.
But they have chosen to actually make horticulture out of
the scope of this particular codes of practice.
This is roles and responsibility which this would fall squarely on,
which seems quite ridiculous. I represent potato growers,
we are mixed farming and quite often are grown with
arable or
with farm animals.
So I can't see how you could apply a code of practice
to one part of your business, but not the other.
So I think when it comes to developing these guidance, which this
legislation will lean on, it's going to be incredibly important to make
sure that all of industry is covered and not just
pick and choose which piece of industry is covered.
Thank you.
Handing back to Sarah.
Thanks. Thanks very much.
All right.
Sarah, yeah?
Yep, just invite any questions. Thanks.
Great. Thank you. Questions from members.
I'll kick off with two questions. One is, in your submission, you talk
about the calculation of when you're under and over 20 people.
One of the understandings I have of my reading is
that
if you expect to be under that,
and therefore a small PCBU,
but then during the season, you employ more
staff, you go over that 20. From that date is when you would then
be considered a large PCBU, and the idea being that you would then have
to lift your game, so to speak. Can you talk
me through how practical you think that would be for
your members in reality?
Well, it is practical, and we do support that change.
It's just that with it needs to come appropriate guidance on how
you determine what a small PCBU is, and Kate can probably
give further examples. But say in the kiwi fruit industry,
for a period of time longer than three months, you would have your core
orchard staff, but you would also employ labor
contractors, RSE workers, which would move you over that
20 threshold. And so in effect, you would be
classed as a large PCBU even though for a majority of
the year you're under that 20, but say for four months
you're not. And so for us, it's about,
well, how do you count?
Do you count other PCBU's that are on your orchard at
the same time as your core staff? Is it just the core staff that you
count? Kate, do you have any more insight into that?
No, I agree. I think really it's got to be very clear
on whose workers are whose and what is counted
in those numbers. Otherwise, it'll be incredibly confusing, and the reality
is is if you're one of those business, you'd just have to set yourself up for the
higher standard,
because you're going to be going in and out of the number of employees
that you have. So you may as well go for gold standard.
Great, and very quickly, the second question is related to your point about codes
of practice, and different industries.
Take, for example, maybe a farm I'm thinking of in our electorate.
Clearly agriculture, got some horticulture, but then also has a
butcher on site as well. How
would you most practically deal with, say, three
different codes of practice in that scenario applying to that
site? What would-Be your thought process on how we should think
about that in terms of the legislation.
Yeah. This is where some of the confusion's going to come in.
It's also in the legislation where we've got different
legislation can apply. It's understanding what legislation
trumps what legislation is going to be really key in
this. So we need to be very, very clear.
The codes of practice,
so if you're a farming operation, you would roles and responsibilities,
you would lean on the roles and responsibility.
At the moment, I'm not sure there's a code of practice for butchery,
so I guess it's just making sure that you're identifying
where your parts of the business will sit.
But yeah, really focusing in on those critical risks as well.
Thank you. Phil Twyford.
Hi, Kate. Hi, Sarah.
In your industry, with given the kind of physical works that m-
uh, many people are doing,
do you think that
musculoskeletal injuries should
be covered in the
obligations on the PCBU?
Do you mean as a critical risk or?
I mean, seriously and substantially responsible
for ensuring that practice is safe.
Kate, I might hand this one over to you.
We did quite a lot of work in this, Phil,
when I was part of Grow Home Safe. Musculoskeletal
within horticulture and agriculture is
incredibly high on the risk scale, as you
well know.
And ACC have done a tremendous amount of work in this space,
and so has horticulture, identifying ways of
movement,
also working with people on repetitive injuries,
which is quite often what happens.
There's also a huge amount of
industry
massive amount in the space. But yes, very, very high on
what
PCBU should be responsible for.
But under this bill,
the-
Well, it would have to be a critical risk, and it would be identified as
such.
Okay.
Good. Thank you.
Sorry. Thanks, Phil. Any other questions?
No. Thank you very much, Kate. Thank you very much, Sarah.
Appreciate your submission this morning. I'm sure we'll see you again.
All right. Thank you.
Team, we're running now ahead of schedule.
If Healthy Work Group is ready, we could go straight to
them. Yes, here we go. Great.
Dr Zoe Port, we've got
10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for questions.
Over to you.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Chair and committee members for your time today and
the chance to speak to you on our submission.
My name is Dr Zoe Port, kia ora, and I'm here as one of the co-directors
of the Healthy Work Group. We're a team of academics and researchers
specializing in evidence-based approaches to workplace health, safety and
wellbeing. We're based at Te Kunenga ki Pūrehuroa Massey University and
work across different disciplines, including management and human resource
management, but also psychology and occupational health and safety.
And so as researchers, our perspective is driven entirely by data.
I will take our submission as read, but I want to just use our
time to highlight a few key areas where we feel there is an evidence gap,
and reiterate that we are deeply concerned that the bill in its current form is
it represents a retrograde step. In our view, it introduces new problems rather
than actually solving existing ones that are there.
We recognize that 10 years into the Health and Safety at Work Act, it was
a good time to review it, but we think,
we don't believe that the direction it's heading will actually be conducive to
better health and safety outcomes.
So first, I'd like to speak to the bill's narrow focus on what
it calls critical risks,
that we believe ignores the true burden of harm in modern workplaces.
The bill explicitly states that it wants to direct resources away from
more minor issues and focus on a mandated list of critical
risks. But the evidence shows us that this approach fundamentally
misunderstands what is actually injuring New Zealanders at work.
Hazards that the bill does not classify as critical, such
as psychosocial hazards and musculoskeletal risks, make up
a really significant amount of workplace harm.
Musculoskeletal disorders in particular account for the majority of ACC's work
injury costs. And I'd like to bring our own data to this as just one
example. Our
New Zealand Workplace Barometer study that we ran over about three or four years
ending in 2020 for now, revealed a pretty high prevalence of
psychosocial hazards. For example, nearly 18% of
workers self-reported experiencing workplace bullying, and almost
40% reported witnessing it. And that's important because international
evidence actually tells us that witnessing bullying in your workplace can often be
just as harmful as having experienced it personally in terms of the
negative outcomes associated with this.
It's certainly not a minor issue, it's certainly not non-critical, even though it's
a lot harder to see. And continuous exposure to these sorts of
behaviors is directly linked to outcomes like severe psychological
distress, depression, anxiety, and, I guess from a
business perspective, high turnover intentions, so high intention to leave the
organization, which we know is a business cost.
And so we really feel the proposed conceptualization of these critical risks as
they stand, effectively narrows the focus to really single-cause physical
events and ignores the really complex, actually
multi-causal nature of
modern workplace harm.And I would just like to reiterate from our
submission that the current Health and Safety at Work Act does already have a
means to acknowledge that a PCBU does not have to do everything conceivable
to avert any possible risk.
The concept of reasonable practicability, that would mean in a situation
where the risk of harm is higher from a particular hazard, such as
those that might fall into what is currently called a critical risk.
That concept of reasonable practicability inherently means that a
PCBU would be expected to do more for such a risk to effectively
prioritize it, compared to things that don't pose as much of a
risk to workers.
Secondly, I'd just like to mention our position to
what we feel is the creation of a two-tiered system that reduces obligations for
small PCBUs, obviously, directing them to just focus on critical
risk. And we feel that this bill implies, whether intended or
not, that workers in small businesses are somehow less worthy of protection.
We know that small businesses comprise 97% of New Zealand's
enterprises and employ about 29% of our workforce.
And again, some of our own research here that's informed our perspective,
in 2023, we completed something called the Healthy Work Project, which was a
multi-year study funded by the Health Research Council and WorkSafe New Zealand,
looking at evaluations for psychosocial risk within
small and medium enterprises. We looked at across three
sectors: early childhood education,
fast-moving consumer goods, and mental health and addiction.
And this project was targeted at SMEs
because the evidence suggests SMEs are more vulnerable when it comes
to health and safety. Because these businesses are often operating
with huge capacity constraints, they often will lack that
internal HR or occupational health and safety expertise,
hence the rationale for our project.
And having undertaken this, we can say that there were SMEs that wanted to do the
right thing. They wanted to know how to keep their workers safe from the
psychosocial hazards. But
because these SMEs will often lack those dedicated resources,
lowering the legal bar doesn't inherently make work safer,
doesn't make the risk go away.
The risk that these workers face doesn't disappear.
This change actually just externalizes the risk, shifting the devastating
consequences of workplace harm onto potentially vulnerable workers, their
whanau, and of course, our public health system.
And where we found success in working with these
organizations was where
we were able to come in and encourage these workplaces to look at evidence, look at
what was needed in their workplaces, and
where guidance came out of that. So just want to drive home here, what is needed is
not a legal exemption for SMEs. What is needed is guidance.
The last point I just want to mention is
we're excited about the potential for
collaborative approved code of practice development.
But as we've noted in our submission, it is absolutely crucial that
worker input is required in part of this, because we are concerned that
potentially
a group driving it may have a vested interest in sort of
setting the bar low for themselves, particularly with the safe harbor provision,
which we oppose.
So yeah, driving home that we absolutely need the requirement for workers to be
involved in developing these. That Healthy Work project I mentioned
earlier, it wasn't just us coming in as academics and saying, "Oh, we know
things. We know some things. We don't know everything." But it was us
facilitating a participatory process with
the workers in these SMEs,
working with them, coming up with their own ideas about how they
could manage psychosocial hazards in their workplace.
Because evidence on worker participation tells us workers are so uniquely
placed to have a really unique perspective on the risks
they face at work and often really novel ways to manage them.
So again, that process showed us the value of worker participation.
And so please, really would encourage you to consider requiring that as
part of the broader ACOP process, because if that is truly collaborative,
I think we may see some good quality ACOPS coming out of
that, rather than
if we have poor ACOPS that don't draw on the range of perspectives they
need, not only might they be ineffective, they might even be dangerous.
So mindful that I'm probably getting close to time, so just thank you for your
attention, for listening, and the chance to speak to you today. Kia ora.
Thanks very much. We've got time for two quick questions. Grant McCollum.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your submission.
The small business angle here, I think, is where the
conversation's really focusing on, and I'm just curious,
when you were talking to the small business, did they
feed back to you about the worries and stresses they had with where
things were at now, and you really feel that the suggestions you've made
will actually address those?
So my response to that, obviously, working closely with the small
businesses, we heard firsthand about the range of pressures upon them, because
obviously the only pressure isn't health and safety, acknowledge that.
But we were in there as health and safety experts.
Yeah.
And what I would say is, so what we were consistently hearing was, "We want to do
the right thing. We want to keep our workers safe, but we don't have the guidance.
We are not getting enough clear direction on what addressing these risks should
look like." So that was the single biggest thing we kept hearing
back from them. I hope that addresses your question.
That's the one I'm best placed to speak to.
The lack of guidance was coming-
Thanks
... through really clearly.
Thank you.
Thank you. And Phil Twyford.
Thank you, Dr. Port. Is there any evidence to suggest that
SMEs are less susceptible to the
kinds of risks like musculoskeletal and psychosocial that are likely
to be excluded from the definitions of critical risk?
Sorry, Phil, can I please... So you're asking is there less evidence that SMEs are
likely to-
Is-
Sorry.
Yeah. Is there any evidence-That SMEs are
less susceptible
to the kinds of things that are likely to be defined as outside-
Mm
... of critical risk, musculoskeletal, psychosocial, and so on.
Thanks. I understand that question now. To put it simply, there is not, no.
There's so much evidence that I don't have time to draw on.
But essentially, there's no clear evidence out there that says the organization
size impacts that at all. It comes down to the nature of work.
And like I said, in many cases, the sheer lack of resource
put behind health and safety can mean they are more susceptible.
Yeah.
There's no evidence that suggests they're less susceptible just because of their
size.
And isn't that the fundamental flaw at the heart of this bill?
So that's the entire concept of this bill.
It's a key concern for us, definitely.
Yeah.
Again, the size of the organization is not a determinant on the actual harm the
worker can face, and that really worries us.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much, Zoe, for joining us this morning.
I appreciate you coming back to the committee this week in this different role.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
And mem-
Thank you, Committee.
Thank you. Members, we're now going to move to Caitlin Wilson.
Caitlin, we have five minutes with you this morning, including any time for
questions. Thanks very much for taking the time to present to the committee.
Over to you.
Kia ora koutou.
I'd just like to say,
letting you speak, say,
I currently
own
Whanau Ake,
Caitlin Wilson. My name is Caitlin Wilson.
I am the general manager for Young Workers Resourcing.
This submission is separate to the submission you guys saw earlier
from YWRC.
But
my formal training is in education and ed tech, and I'm a current health and safety
rep.
I have been involved in the union movement for about 10 years, starting as a
delegate, in a corporate setting.
And then I moved to Workers First as a member support organizer.
Now I do something similar through YWRC for unionized young workers.
And I say all this to give you an understanding of my exposure to other workers'
experiences and what led me to want to speak to this Health and Safety
Amendment Bill. I want to make three key points today.
First, why reducing so-called non-critical risk is dangerous,
particularly for those new and young workers.
Second, how assumed knowledge increases harm in workplaces.
And third, why these changes are likely to increase costs to workers, small
businesses, and health system. So when I first started at Workers First,
I went in naively thinking that I would be able to single-handedly eradicate
workplace bullying, only to realize how complicated our current system is
and how difficult it is for workers to challenge when they're being unfairly
treated at work. The proposal to reduce the current protections further,
particularly for what is considered not critical risk, terrifies me.
I firmly believe our health and safety protections for workers need to be amplified
and improved, not reduced.
We live in a capitalist society that thrives on people.
That's why workers need these protections in place.
My next point comes from our understanding of the world and the knowledge that we
have built up through our experiences during our lifetime.
This knowledge becomes so ingrained that we don't have to consciously access
it. So this concept of assumed knowledge is also described as
common sense, or assumed knowledge is dangerous in the workplace because
conditions that feel obvious to experienced workers are not obvious to new workers
or potentially even contractors.
So in short, we know what we don't know, and we don't know what others know.
Why the current hierarchy of controls to manage the risks and having clear
procedures matter. They protect people who don't practice assumed knowledge,
and when we downgrade so-called non-critical risks, we push people into learning
lessons the hard way, through injury, stress, or harm.
One of the policy objectives in the regulatory impact statement was to reduce
unnecessary costs for business, consumers, and taxpayers,
although I genuinely believe that the proposed changes, particularly the narrow
definition of critical risk, will do the opposite.
I'd like to refer to Dr. Zoe Pott's contribution to TU's submission on Friday,
and the concern she raised on the unique damage that psychosocial risks create,
affecting workers' mental and physical health outside of the workplace.
Failing to manage those psychosocial and so-called non-critical risk,
non-critical physical risks leads to injury, stress, and long-term
absence.
That costs
us through healthcare use, temporary staffing, retraining, and staff
turnover. The proposed exceptions being made for small PCBU seems
illogical in this sense because they will feel these costs much more than larger
businesses will. Work-related harm cost Aotearoa an estimated 4.4
billion in 2022. Narrowing responsibilities will increase that
burden, not reduce it. So in summary, I do not support the proposed
changes in the Health and Safety Amendment Bill.
Reducing obligations around non-critical risk ignores how harm accumulates,
especially psychosocial harm. It's just the cost for workers, small businesses,
and our public system. Instead of weakening protections, we can invest in clearer
guidance, stronger codes of practice, and legislation that puts people
before profit. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Any questions for Caitlin?
Thank you, Caitlin. Appreciate the time you've taken to present to us this morning.
Awesome. Thank you so much. Have a good day.
Ka kite.
So members, I'm now going to invite Energy Trust of New Zealand Incorporated
and Southland Electric Power Supply Consumer
Trust
to present to us on a very specific amendment they are
proposing for the
piece of legislation. Ben,
you've got 10 minutes with us this morning if
indeed we need all of that, but over to you.
Take your submission as read and
happy for you to add anything to it and then include some time for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good morning members of the committee.
I'm joined this morning by Ms. Cathy Bell, the stakeholder manager for
Energy Trusts New Zealand. I also hopefully have with me Mr.
Wade Devine and Mr. Steve Kenny, who are both trustees of the Southland
Electric Consumer Power Supply Trust.
In terms of the order of my submission this morning, yes, happy to take,
written submission as read. What I propose to do is to first
call Cathy to speak very briefly to the context of energy trusts in New
Zealand.
Wade and Steve will then speak specifically to the context
of being a trustee in these organizations, and then I propose to just sum up the
key points and take any questions with your leave, Mr. Chair.
So Cathy, if I could please hand over to you first.
Right. So I guess a very quick history lesson.
The history of electricity in New Zealand is a collective one, where
groups of businessmen and often councils got
together and built generation, and
then built the poles and the wires that took that
generation to their businesses and to the towns that
they lived in.
These grew over time and formed into municipal
electricity boards and then, at the time
of the Bradford reforms, these
had the
choice to either retain the generation or to
retain the lines and poles, and most
stayed with the lines and poles and became lines companies.
The majority of these were owned by trusts of consumers,
and then the intention was that the trusts
would sell, and they would become corporates, and it would become
one sort of corporate system.
Most of the trusts in New Zealand did not
sell, and they retained their ownership.
My members at ECNZ are largely rural and
provincial, although having said that, in trust,
the largest lines
energy trust in the country is in Auckland and
owns Vector.
So national organization, members
are all elected,
so all the trustees are
elected. It's a very significant community
connection, and in a lot of places,
when the trust deed has it, that if the trust
finishes its life, those assets go to
councils. So there is a very similar sort of
familiarity between energy trusts and council
organizations.
That's probably covers about it, Ben, for the-
Thank you
... for the submission.
Thank you, Cathy. Wade and Steve, if you're with us, do you want to add anything
further from a trustee perspective?
Possibly then I-
Can't hear. No.
I think just for the benefit of the clerk, is there a Thinkdex
Southland
that's joined?
Yeah. They're on here, but they haven't unmuted or
turned their camera on.
Right. Well, look, in that case, I'll move straight to
summarizing the key points. So it's a very discrete issue that we're looking at
around
officer duties arising under Section 44 of the act, and more specifically, the
exemptions presently provided for under Section
52.
Essentially, the situation has become somewhat...
Oh, sorry, I think Wade and Steve are with us now, so I might pause if Wade and
Steve you wish to add anything.
Okay.
Yep. Oh, thank you very much for the opportunity. I'm Stephen Kenny.
I'm trustee of
the Southland Electric Power Supply
Trust. Just briefly following on from Cathy's points, and I'm
sure Ben's points, we're an elected body
and
we have a letter of expectation. We
appoint
the directors of the company that operate the power network
lines company locally, and we have in a letter of
expectation, we have a requirement to ensure that health and safety and so
on is well resourced in
the activities of the company.
But we don't consider ourselves to be a PCBU,
as an elected entity. And
we feel that we are very similar to that of an elected council,
similar position and are not considered, and have never
considered ourselves to be a PCBU.
However, we have
considered health and safety as a very important part of the
company's operation. And every year we create a letter of
expectation that very clearly lays out that there
has to be adequate resourcing for health and safety in the activities of the
company. So I think that's pretty much the position we
have, and we feel that there needs to be a carve-out in the
amendment to recognize that difference.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Ben.
Thank you. So yes, just building on what Steve's mentioned, essentially that is
what is sought by
the community and consumer trusts, an equivalent carve-out to
that presently there for territorial and regional authorities.
That can be done relatively easily with the suggested amendment to Section
52,
subsection two, by adding a further subsection E, that
links to the existing definition provided for in the Electricity
Industry Act. Essentially, the concern from the
trusts is the level of exposure that may presently
exist, and that's been amplified by the recent Court of Appeal case of RH &
JY Trust and WorkSafe, whichmuddies the
waters rather than clears them in terms of the scope of trustee
liability. Probably just to re-emphasize that point,
we would submit that
these energy trusts are on all fours with a
territorial authority, and the inconsistency essentially
is
many councils own shares in electricity companies as well, in
very similar structure. They have access to this
carve-out. Elected trustees of consumer and
customer trusts don't, and the long-term concern,
the trust holders, this may impact the willingness
of people to stand for these bodies and to engage in community and
public service as a result. So in essence, that's
the thrust of our submission. I'm happy to take any questions.
Thanks very much, Ben. I think it's pretty clear for us.
Any questions from the committee?
No. Look, thank you very much for taking the time to highlight this point
and to present to the committee today.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Members, we are now going to invite Minerals Industry
Safety and Health Centre.
Maureen Hassell, we have 10 minutes with you
this morning, including any time for questions. Over to you.
Okay. Good morning. My name is Professor Maureen Hassell.
I am a professor and the director of the Minerals Industry Safety
and Health Centre at the University of Queensland.
I've been researching, teaching, and providing expert advice on
critical risk and critical control across the high-hazard
industries across the world.
I have a background in both engineering and psychology,
and have been at the University of Queensland for over
15 years. Prior to that, I was working in industry,
predominantly the mining industry
in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.
So I made a submission
to this
amendment because I'm absolutely passionate about zero fatalities,
and I work across,
as I said, the world and across the high-hazard industries, trying to
improve the management of risk with a particular focus
on fatality prevention
and preventing those career and
life-ending injuries, illnesses,
and diseases.
So I was very interested to see what you are doing in New
Zealand and
really
am grateful for the opportunity to speak today and for--
It was really good to see that critical risks are highlighted
in your amendment. My
submission came from
a motivation to really see a
global, if not trans-Tasman,
understanding of what critical risks are and how they
should be managed.
So
in reviewing your amendment, I noticed that
there is a focus on death notifiable injuries,
illnesses, and incidents
with a view that by highlighting critical risks, they can get the
priority they deserve, and I think that's absolutely
excellent.
Some of the challenges that have been experienced globally
are around actually identifying those critical risks.
And a couple of things that have
been learnt over time and over analysis of the
incidents is that critical risks
should be defined by the PCBU based on the
actual maximum potential seriousness of the
consequence, irrespective of likelihood.
And looking at what the
true maximum potential seriousness of the consequence
is based on some evidence, not just based on opinion.
So one of the things we find, and it's been some of
the more prominent cases are the Dreamworld
disaster here in Australia and the dam disaster in Brazil,
where the
risk of those incidents were assessed, but they
were underappreciated because they were
assessed both on a
perceived
consequence and a perceived likelihood, not the actual
maximum potential consequence.
So my suggestion, and I'm happy
to answer questions about it, was that
the definition of critical risk could be
refined to state what a
PCB-- It should be based on what a PCB
knows and ought reasonably to know about the
maximum potential seriousness of the consequence that might result in an
unwanted event scenario, and then link it to the list of hazards,
not just base it on the hazards themselves.
Because the
seriousness of the
hazard
and its potential to result in a consequence of single or
multiple fatalities or career and life-ending
incidents can vary from
company to company.
So that was the basis of
my submission today, but I'm happy to
answer any questions or
elaborate further if you wish.
Okay, thank you. There's a question from Grant McCullum.
Yeah. Given your focus internationally, I'm just
intrigued. One of the
things we're trying to do here, one of the challenges here was small business
really struggle with the whole health and safety concept to the degree,
in the sense that they're not usually big enough to have someone who's a
professional health and safety person to set themselves up.
What do you see internationally that works for small business so they can
feel confident that they're addressing the risks under the law and
for their businesses?
So typically, these
fatality risks are known, right?
Mm-hmm.
The same risks are killing people globally, at least the top
five of these risks.
And
how to control these risks, the controls are actually known as
well.
So providing advice on
how to control the risks, how to check the controls,
has been useful. I know one of the
things that we've found when we look across
the, or have looked and worked with the agriculture sector in
Australia, is that how that
advice is provided,
and how that guidance is provided is as key
as the guidance itself.
So producing a whole lot of documentation is not going to help a farmer who's
working
long hours and doesn't necessarily have time to
sit down and find the documentation and then read
through it. But providing a
resource that comes to
the farm, has a look and
works with the farmer
on the farm on providing advice seems to work a lot
better.
The same with
other
small scale entities where you have a kind of a coach that
works them through them and the provision of that,
that is based on a good understanding
of and a
focus on the critical. So what are your critical risks?
What are your critical controls, we call them?
So the key controls that are absolutely
non-negotiable for protecting people when they're exposed
to these risks.
Thank you. That's very helpful. Appreciate that. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Doesn't appear we have any other questions.
That's-
Appreciate you taking the time to submit to the-
Yeah
... committee this morning.
Can I just say one more point?
Yeah.
So just on that point, understanding the
competencies that are required to get good risk
management is key to understanding
how to support all
people that have duties associated with protecting
workers' health and safety. So competency, people
just don't know this stuff if they want to do it well.
There are some fundamentals that you have to learn.
So thinking about that is also key.
In some jurisdictions, they actually make
the training
mandated through statutory positions.
So they delegate statutory positions and make training
key, whether it's an engineering role, or whether it's in the mining
industry,
they have statutory positions.
Some drilling industries have statutory positions.
So it's usually a part of their
CPD and a part of their mandated training.
So thinking about making
PCBs
responsible for ensuring that people have the competency to
do the work is as equally as key as the
focus on critical risk.
Thank you very much
for your submission this morning.
We appreciate you taking the time to present to the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Members,
we now move to Stefan
Cavell-Fowler for a five-minute submission.
Stefan's ready.
Morning, Stefan. Just unmute yourself there. We can see you.
There we go.
Thank you.
We've got five minutes with you this morning, including time for questions.
Tena koutou katoa. My name's Stefan Cavell-Fowler.
I represent SafetyQuest Consultancy, and I've been
a person in the profession for over 15
years.
I've worked in a lot of the high-risk sector areas, including
defense, construction, medical,
and other areas around safety. So,
while I support the idea of simplifying compliance, I do
have some issues around the Amendment Bill, which I
believe will create capability traps and regulatory
gaps, that are further widened and not actually land what we're trying
to achieve.
The first area I want to talk about is the likelihood fallacy.
It's been an issue since we've tried to use it as a
point for reasonableness in our legislation, even coming back to the
HSE '92 act. It's an unreliable
point for governance,
and one of the major issues is that a lot of our risk management is based around
subjectivityAnd we've just had COVID, for
example, that's a one in a hundred year event.
Most of those won't have them on their registers after five to 10 years.
So
some people could say that was a reasonable
area to have critical controls in place
or be a critical risk,
and that may not be
true as far as the business is concerned.
Plus, on top of that, the others will look at statistical probability, which
isn't usually used as a area in court
for some defenses. So that can be a challenge for them if they're
trying to do the best they can and actually they're not
meeting the requirements.
So I would recommend that we look at the critical risk definition
and change it to, could reasonably be expected to result in,
so that would actually also help practically provide guidance for
professionals and for laypeople in governance to be
able to understand what those critical risks are, particularly because a lot of
them like to have a short number of critical risks,
and so they can be able to focus on those areas and make sure that they are
providing the safety that they want for their people.
I'd also look at the idea of the safe harbor,
and I like the idea of the safe harbor, but I think you have to remember that a
safe harbor is where a ship is kept safe, and a ship is
designed to sail on the ocean. It's not designed to stay in the harbor.
So we need to be very strong in our, and shape it around
verification and what is the work that's done, what are those risks that are
identified, and confirm that those controls are in place.
Because if the business believes that they're
actually doing what they believe is reasonable for their defense,
if they've got that in place, they'll have a defense in court, and there won't be a
carte blanche prosecution,
and they're advised by their legal team
to
accept guilt or take a enforceable
undertaking because they don't feel they have their systems strong enough in
place. So I think that as the
previous
person was saying, we've got to look away from just the paperwork thing.
We actually have to have ways of verifying that what's in place is happening,
and do so appropriate to the size of the business.
I also think there's an issue around, and I understand the idea of if you've got
less than 20 workers, then just focus on critical risks.
However, particularly in the construction industry and a number of other high-risk
work industries,
they work on subcontractors who have those size of businesses,
and the expectation of the tier one construction people won't be to change
their systems that they have in place and what's required already.
So there will be no change for them about simplifying their requirements.
There is a lot of good work being done by those tier one contractors to help
shape and guide and influence them.
And I think the issue around overlapping duties, while it sounds
rather simple in basic concept because of that confusion, who's
responsible for what and things,
it is a challenge to be able to
get across the line. But
just putting all the responsibility on the tier ones,
they're just sort of automatically going to trickle that down to their
subcontractors and say, "You have to meet our requirements." So there won't be any
changes there. And there'll be other
businesses who have franchises and things like that, particularly if they're
connected in with Australia, that will be trickling down their requirements from
Australia and ensuring that that would be the same for
smaller franchises and businesses as well.
So while I see the intent, I just don't think that's the right
area. The risk is really the same
across the businesses, and it needs to be managed with equal
certainty across all.
I also put in that I think that
we should separate MB and have them as the policy and doing
the
ACODs and have
WorkSafe as purely more of a regulator.
I don't think
putting them as an education thing in the legislation will be effective.
That was tried before when WorkSafe was first brought in, and
we still have confusion around what people expect
on that sort of thing. So-
Great.
I'll be-
Thanks, Stefan. Is any final point you want to make as we've come to time?
Yeah, I just would like to look at it as an integrity-based model and look around
reassurance further than just
looking at a set of lists and hoping that you're ticking a box.
Look, thank you for taking the time to present to the committee this morning.
We really appreciate it. Members, we now
have a break until our next submission at 9:35.
So we'll just,
be please be back on sharp at 9:35.
Thanks, Stefan.
Thank you.
Okay, members, it's 9:35. We're ready for our next
submission from Master Plumbers, Gasfitters
and Drainlayers.
So if we can get Lisa
front here.
Hi, Lisa. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for
questions. So we'll hand over to you.
Oh,
are we all good there? Thank you. Can you hear me all right?
We can.
Okay, wonderful. Thank you, Chair and members of the committee for the opportunity
to speak today. My name is Lisa Omland.
I'm a representative for Master Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers New Zealand,
the peak industry body representing the plumbing, gasfitting, and drainlaying
trades nationwide. Now, we support the intent of the Amendment Bill
and the goal of making health and safety both workable and effective.
Our industry operates in high-risk environments, and robust
safeguards are important for our members.
We also recognize the government's desire to reduce unnecessary compliance
burdens, particularly for small businesses.
However, there are several practical considerations that we believe need refinement
to ensure the bill delivers on its objectives.
So the first point I'd like to bring up is the small PCBU category,
which I believe some others have spoken to earlier this morning.
Mm-hmm.
The majority of Master Plumbers business members employ fewer than 20 workers,
meaning they would fall under the proposed small PCBU
category. In principle, reducing compliance complexity for small firms
is positive. But the reality is that many small plumbing businesses work
on construction sites controlled by larger principal contractors.
Those larger PCBUs are required to operate under more complex
worker participation structures and documentation systems.
This raises some key questions. How will these new small PCBU
provisions operate in multi-PCBU environments?
And will a subcontractor be expected to comply with principal contractors' full
system regardless of their size?
Without explicit guidance, there is a risk that the practical effect
of the small PCBU category will be minimal, as small
subcontractors may be still required to comply with the larger contractors'
systems. So this creates a bit of uncertainty and undermines, I think, the purpose
of that differentiated criteria in that regard.
It's also worth noting a cultural risk.
Subcontractors sometimes feel reluctant to report incidents on a principal
contractor's site for fear of reputational damage or loss of future work.
So clear reinforcement of those shared responsibilities across the
PCBUs would support a healthy reporting environment.
So our recommendation is that more clarity is provided for how worker participation
obligations apply in multi-PCBU environments,
particularly in the construction sector where this is very common.
Our second point is regard the shift towards prioritizing critical risks.
So the bill provides a clear focus on life-threatening hazards deemed critical
risks. Ideally, this will mean businesses spend less time on performative
compliance and can refocus attention on those key
hazards. However, the emphasis on critical risks may discourage
workers from raising issues that fall outside of that category.
So in the construction industry, there's a lot of those that-That
are quite considerable concerns that are not necessarily critical, but
may
result in significant long-term harm.
I'm talking about things like risks of slips and trips, manual
handling injuries, noise, vibration, fatigue, and mental health
concerns, which is a considerable issue in the construction industry.
So for,
these may not be critical, but they are very common.
And what we don't want is a system where the worker's level of protection depends
on the size of their employer. So, in this case, we recommend the
bill recognize the importance of identifying and managing non-critical but common
risks, particularly for small PCBUs.
Our third point is regarding ensuring small businesses understand their
obligations. For many small firms, the combination of running a business, managing
staff, meeting regulatory requirements can be overwhelming.
So introducing new categories and criteria, such as the small
PCBU criteria I touched on before, may increase that confusion unless
accompanied by clear, practical instruction.
So that's just a bit of a hark back to the point earlier about just that clear,
making sure those divisions are clear and those responsibilities are clear.
Just to touch on prequalification systems, we believe the
amendment bill provides an opportunity to actually address another key
challenge faced by our members, which relates to the inconsistent
prequalification requirements imposed by clients and principal contractors.
Many large firms use international frameworks, often from the UK and
Australia, which don't always align with New Zealand standards.
An example of this is differing PPE requirements for identical
tasks depending on the client,
the requirement to purchase additional equipment to satisfy site-specific policy,
rather than legislative necessity.
So this leads to increased administration workload and costs, particularly for
small businesses. And we would just recommend the development of a
nationally recognized health and safety prequalification framework to
provide consistency across the sector.
Finally, a note on enforcement and accountability.
We support strong enforcement for deliberate non-compliance.
Businesses that take health and safety seriously invest heavily in training,
equipment, and proper maintenance.
They should not be placed at a commercial disadvantage compared to those who cut
corners. In saying that, enforcement must be balanced with
education. So many small business owners underestimate the seriousness of their
obligations, and we recommend that WorkSafe increase proactive
engagement with high-risk trades so that business owners
understand both their responsibilities and the consequences of failing
to meet them. So in summary, to ensure the bill delivers
meaningful improvements, Master Plumbers recommends clarifying obligations for
small PCBUs operating in multi-PCBU environments,
ensuring non-critical but common risks are not deprioritized, providing
clear practical implementation guidance for small businesses, developing a
consistent health and safety prequalification framework, and strengthening
WorkSafe's proactive engagement with high-risk trades. Thank you for your time.
I welcome any questions from the committee.
Thanks very much. Honorable Phil Twyford.
We can't hear you, Phil.
Sorry.
Yeah.
How many workers in your industry, Lisa, would be
employed by businesses with 20 or fewer workers?
I would say the vast majority.
Mm-hmm.
I think the average size of a plumbing business in New Zealand is three
employees.
Yep.
And that's including often admin staff as well as the actual trade
practitioners. So I would say the vast majority of businesses would fall under that
20 individuals.
And how many thousand people would that be?
I wouldn't have the figures off the top of my head.
But yeah, I would certainly say the
majority
would be considered small businesses in that respect.
And how do you feel about all of those workers in your industry,
under this bill, no longer having substantive
protection for what you've described as the
common construction industries, like
slips and trips, manual handling injuries, fatigue and long
hours, mental health and suicide prevention?
Yeah, so that's a concern. That's why we have brought that one up.
Obviously, we don't want to focus on critical risks to take away from
that, so I think there needs to be a balance there.
And certainly in an industry like ours, some of what you would call not
critical risks can be critical in the long term.
So I think it's just that balance of acknowledging that for specific industries,
there might be some common risks that do need further
prioritization.
Yep. Thank you.
Yeah.
Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Hi. Thank you for your submission.
Just curious, so what sort of feedback do you get from your members about
dealing with the health and safety regime? I'm just curious, given your submission.
So I think we have a bit of a range. As I said,
we have our one-man bands. You might have just one trade professional working.
You've got obviously larger businesses as well.
So we do have a variety. Obviously, we are a
little bit skewed because our members go through a
quality assurance to become a Master Plumbers member.
So you'll generally find that our members are fulfilling those health and safety
obligations because that's a requirement to join our organization.
So I think we probably skew towards the more prepared and more onto
it in that respect. But in saying
that, we've had a dedicated health and safety person
who's liaised with businesses.
Yeah.
And there can be quite a bit of confusion as to
obligations, maintenance requirements, things like that.
So I think the want is there to do well.
Sometimes the navigation of the system is where people get a bit confused
and maybe might be missing something that they
do need to do. So in our case, we try to provide those resources.
But, certainly,
as I've said, proactive engagement from WorkSafe is always beneficial in
that case.
And just a quick sup if I may.
Last question. Yep.
Yeah, sure. And
your members, do they come to you actively seeking advice and
so forth? And do you find the advice you give, do you actually go to
WorkSafe and ask them to help you with the guidance you give?
So we have liaisons where they can come through us, it's part of
our member services.
Yep, cool.
And we do then liaise with the various-- We're almost like an in-between
there to see how we can help in that regard, and obviously in legal
requirements, we would have that checked over by someone with that professional
advice. So yeah, we do provide, in a sense, that medium person to
say, "Let's find out what your obligations are in that instance, and see
what resources we can use to find out that information."
Thank you.
Thanks very much, Lisa. I appreciate your time with us this morning.
Members, we're now inviting the Construction Health and Safety New Zealand Trust
to present to us. That's Chris
Alderson, Roger Macrae,
and
John Hemi.
Macrae, rather.
Good morning, Chris. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time
for questions. Over to you.
Hi. Good morning, everyone. Look, I'm Chris Alderson.
I'm the TE at Construction Health and Safety New Zealand Trust.
Roger was going to join us this morning, but I think he's just struggling to
get in. But-
Okay
... I'll push forward anyway.
So business is a charity, just dedicated to reducing harm in the New Zealand
construction sector.
We use evidence-based initiatives.
We've been working for about eight years, and they're recognized internationally as
leading practice. So we're created by industry, for industry.
And we're also the voice for small businesses, which I'll get into a little
bit,
that make up the majority of the sector.
So my background, I've been working
in, I guess, for over 35 years in New Zealand and
internationally.
I was implemented Fonterra's Critical Risk program in the sort
of mid-2014s, around there.
So I've done a lot of work in this area.
And I'm often working with boards and companies
on an advisory level as well.
So look, a note about the New Zealand construction industry.
Our industry is made up of many small businesses.
In fact, it's over 98% of the businesses have less than 20 workers,
and there's around about 85,000 businesses within the construction sector.
It's actually one of the most dangerous industries globally to work in.
Low barriers to entry, relatively low productivity, and very high levels of
business attrition as well. So construction workers suffer from nearly twice the
national average in poor physical and mental health conditions.
It's very rare to see a construction worker over the age of about 35 who isn't
dealing with a significant enduring physical or mental health condition.
Despite that, we've made a lot of progress over the past five years.
We've had 27% reduction in ACC claims since
2022, although around about 19% of that's probably due to business
activity climbing down, but there's definitely a 7% performance
improvement that we've made there.
And that's been really with a focused effort in reducing claims, most of them
musculoskeletal conditions.
We believe that this performance improvement is at risk, though, through this bill.
So the requirement that only organizations with 20 or more employees,
which is only 2% of our construction businesses,
also manage non-critical risks such as musculoskeletal harm, it
doesn't reflect the industry's burden of harm.
So the hard-won gains we've made would be threatened by a regulatory signal that
this type of harm is not to be a focus.
The existing act, consistent with international best practice legislation, already
includes requirements for businesses to manage risk proportionally, i.e., critical
risk.
Good construction businesses prioritize the prevention of serious harm and
fatalities.
Organizations experienced in critical risk management understand that there's kind
of two high-level complementary focal points.
The first is to identify the work-related hazards, which with the potential to
seriously or fatally injure a person.
And what you do then is you invest in strong physical controls to limit the
exposure. So controls that actually work regardless of the
human performing or not. On average in construction, we can do this
about 40% to 60% of the time. So there's a gap.
So again, between 40% to 60% of the time, we actually can't do that
because of the nature of the work. What we have to do then is really
support human performance, and this is about supporting humans to make the right
decisions about how the work can be carried on safely.
One of the issues we have is that when humans are impaired, their decision-making
ability is also degraded, and that's a really well-known and well-researched
factor in work-based fatalities.
So the primary reasons for impairment in the construction sector are, again, poor
physical and mental health,
the very thing this bill deprioritizes.
If improvement of critical risk is an objective, then this bill, we think it's an
own goal to that objective. We think that true critical
risk management takes on a more holistic approach than just prioritizing management
of serious hazards as set out in this bill.
So the simplification and standardization of safety management, I think they're
worthy objectives. There are layers of what we call safety clutter that
have built up in many industries, much of which does not actually improve the harm
reduction for workers. We don't, however, believe this bill has addressed the
causes of this buildup, and could perversely increase
complexity and overhead for small construction businesses.
So construction projects are a collection of PCBU's coming together on
a site to create or build environments.
A residential build in New Zealand would rarely have more than 20 workers on site
at any one time, and almost never from one single PCBU.
Commercial and civil construction often has a larger principal organization,
but then subcontracting through many smaller businesses over time.
So a focus on PCBUs with more or fewer than 20 workers
is kind of arbitrary, it's complex, and we think it's almost impossible to
enforce in a construction context, regardless of the inherent
inequality of workers' rights that a two-tier system
createsSo the focus on better guidance is a positive
aspect of the bill. Because of the multi-PCBU site project nature of
construction work,
which differs from the PCBU focus in most other sectors, there's
been considerable global success in developing construction-specific regulation
and guidance. So we commend this approach to investing more in the development of
ACOPS,
but we caution that these do not replace regulations where needed.
Industry invested a lot of time over the past five years assisting the government
in the creation of much-needed plant structures and working on height rigs, and
only to see these shelved.
Industry, government, and workers all need to contribute to the development of
guidance, and budgetary provision needs to be made for their development and
upkeep. We think that an ACOPS on average
costs about $250,000 to produce,
and then needs to be maintained. Currently, we can't see any provision for this
development or upkeep, which we hope will be addressed.
So the construction industry needs to retain and further increase the gains it's
made in reducing both critical and chronic harm.
The prioritization of critical risk should not come at the expense of the most
prevalent source of harm in the industry, and in fact, the evidence shows that this
would be counterproductive to reducing serious harm and fatalities.
So reducing the burden on businesses of the work in the name of safety
does not actually make work safer as needed.
The root causes of this don't lie within the current bill, though.
There are better ways of doing this.
Creating a two-tier safety system based on the number of workers that a
business has is problematic. We think a coordinated system-wide
approach of government, industry, and workers combining to create a
productive and sustainable future is integral to
getting through.
Better guidance is a good thing, but it needs to be taken into the context across
the wider system. And thank you.
Time for questions, and to see Roger's actually-
Thanks for...
We've got time for two quick questions. Honorable Phil Twyford.
So, Chris, thanks for the submission. It's really excellent.
So the upshot is that construction is one of our
most dangerous industries in terms of fatalities
and injuries per worker, isn't that correct?
It's up there, yes.
Yeah.
As far as DNA, yep.
And because of the
prevalence of the subcontracting model, it's almost
all work sites, as I think you just said, are small
SME-level PCBUs.
Yeah.
So the effect of that is this bill would be to substantially
reduce the health and safety protection for one of our
most dangerous industries. Isn't that correct?
Correct.
Okay.
Do you see any value or logic behind the
carve-out for SMEs?
Not in a construction context, which is, I guess, what we're coming to you today
with. So-
Okay
... we think it's actually quite dangerous.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay. Grant McCallum.
Yeah, I'm just curious. You highlighted the fact that there are
very few workers over 35 in your sector that don't have mental
health challenges.
Did I hear you right?
Mental and physical, so we-
And physical. Sorry, you didn't state that. I was just curious. So, okay.
And is that-
Okay.
Yeah, that was all I wanted to say. Thank you.
So clarified there. Thank you very much.
Thanks very much, Chris, for taking the time to present to us this morning.
I'm sure you'll follow the progress of this bill with interest.
Thank you.
Thanks, Roger.
Yeah.
Okay. We're now going to the Port Industry Association,
and we have...
I'm not sure who we have representing. Pat Kirk. There we go.
Pat, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for questions.
Can you turn your mic and your video on, Pat?
Oops.
Start my video.
Okay, we can hear you now.
All right. Yeah, I'm-
There we go. Okay.
We're away.
Great.
Okay. So I'm David Wakelin and this is Pat Kirk, so we're
representing the Port Industry Association, which represents
a,
sort of, the major chunk of the players in the port sector,
including the 13 port companies,
the five major stevedoring companies, the three major container park
operators.
And,
yeah, so we represent a good coverage of the industry there.
The industry's sort of nationally significant.
We've got around 15,000 direct port
workers in the port sector, plus another whole string of about
75,000 other nationwide jobs, so we
have a
reasonable footprint there.
So we've been on a pretty good journey, bit like the construction industry
there, we're around sort of collaboration and improving our
own health and safety performance.
The industry's developed an ACOP,
one of two, I believe, that's
one of the approved ones around. We've won, as an industry, won
collaboration awards with the unions, the regulator, and
the Port Industry Association,
the Safeguard Awards. So we've been on a pretty good journey.
And
Pat's going to
talk to
some of the specific things that are
specific to the ports industry and special to the port industry that we think
might be impacted by some of the reform
proposals.
All right. Thank you. Thanks for the opportunity to present this
morning. So just-Following on from Dave's comment,
the
Honorable Phil Twyford will know our sector quite well.
We've had a bit to do with Phil in the past.
Basically, why we're really keen to have a verbal
submission as well as a written one is that the port environment is
quite unique. It's not like construction as
operations where you've got a principal and multiple subcontractors.
Port environment is very typically a single site, multi PCBU operations where you
have multiple PCBUs working adjacent.
Say, on one vessel, you could have up to five different PCBUs.
Very commonly, those PCBUs have no commercial relationship with each other.
So you're literally having to get five strangers working nicely to load a vessel.
So the key to our success as a sector has been
the consultation collaboration.
So very
core underpinning aspect is that ability to work with
parties where everyone is on the same playing field with the same understanding
around risk management, whether it's enterprise risk or operational risk, you
all are on the same playing ground.
So for us, that was quite a unique and key feature we thought
this panel would like to understand why we're doing this
thing here. There's
numerous elements with the proposed reform bill
that we think could threaten
that approach. We've had many years, well before the HSWA Act
came in, that was our operating model. It's worked very successfully.
Again, it's
morphed and matured into a sector-wide
risk mitigation strategy called the Insights Program.
Again, there, there's a multi-year program put together across the whole port
sector, all the operators in key areas to improve health and
safety and performance across the sector.
Again, underpinned through this, everyone understanding the same rules apply to
every party involved in those discussions.
So for our key time
constraints, we only really touch on three elements.
One is a small PCBU carve-out.
For us, we see that as a significant threat to the model we run
in the sector, given that we will now run a two-tier safety system
and therefore, depending who you are dealing with, we'll have different
rules, different duties. That is a foreign concept to us here.
We've run for 20 plus years. We, everybody had the same duties,
everybody had the same understanding.
We see that as an architectural failure, if you like,
of the proposal, where we'll have different parties.
Added to that is the larger entities, the larger PCBUs will have
to pick up those duties. So that again comes with complexity and
cost compliance to the larger PCBUs.
It will put Great Australian on our safety management systems and our oversight and
assurance programs, again, which is almost
abdicating the small PCBUs from the work they're currently doing.
At the moment, they do those duties, and they understand the expectations.
No matter who they work with on the port sector, that is the expectations, and they
are actively doing it. So we just can't understand why you'd undo that
aspect of it.
The other key one for us is the predominant focus on critical
risk. Again, the port sector has a
universal risk management approach where we look at all
risk, and we prioritize critical risk.
So again, by carving out a focus for critical
risk
being put on a pedestal, we understand it and we support it.
But at the cost of dropping
the requirement to manage the remaining risk,
for us, we feel is a significant failing because the
main injury mechanisms in the port sector are non-critical risk,
particularly musculoskeletal. So that is our highest source of injury
for the port sector. We hit the headlines in the past where
we've had, sadly, fatalities. But when you look at the cost
to the business, the injury to our workers, it is musculoskeletal, which will
fall under the radar with the new approach.
So again, we just think that is a fundamental failing with it.
The other big risk, though, is it normalizes or
accepts non-critical risk within a sector which I believe
is fundamentally morally wrong. So that in a picture
for me is again a major flaw.
The third area for us that we're quite
concerned about is the industry-led ACOPS.
Again, we fully support that, and as demonstrated with our
ship loading cargo handling ACOP, we put a huge
amount of effort into that document development, huge amount of consultation.
But the key thing I understand currently within the legislation there is the triple
two
clause which does legally require consultation between employers and the
unions.
Our concern is that that is the default, whereas in reality, it needs to be
wider than that. So the key part of the development of our ACOP was
the whole of industry consultation.
So that was industry associations, it was the regulator, it was the
unions, it was the non-unionized workforce.
We have significant non-unionized workforce elements, green and yellow
unions within the big stevedoring operations.
So our request there would be that any development of
industry-led ACOPS, which we do support because they are a really good
mechanism, must have guaranteed wide sector
consultation and not just union and employer.
So they're the key points there.
Yeah. Thank you.
Oh, yes.
And an example there is that you wouldn't want one of
those many unions and one of the many ports working together
on an ACOP that may have impacts over the wider industry without
full wider industry consultation and
input.
Because the concern there is there's only 13 commercial ports in New Zealand.
So the regulator tends to takeUm, best
practice from one port, quite rightly, and applies that as a benchmark on
the other port operations, which I've-- we've got no issue with that at all.
The issue is where we get, um, I guess,
circumventing of the intent of this, where you get one
union working with one port to come up with an ACOT.
They can tick the employer union consultation box and meet Triple Two too,
but they are not representing the sector.
So traditionally, for the port sector, their,
their main mechanism for getting industry collaboration is through
entities like yourselves, like Port Industry Association, we, we can generally,
hand on heart, say we have full sector consultation.
So that's just a, a key point we wanted to make there.
So we can open up-
Okay
... to questions if you, if you've got any questions.
Yeah. We've got time for probably a quick question. Um, Phil Twyford.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, guys, and I want to acknowledge, uh, I know a number
of your members have, I think, have made really impressive progress on health and
safety over the years, and um, in a, in a, you know, a pretty
challenging, uh, industry environment.
Um, take really note what you said about
the, uh, the small PCBU carve-out
and the danger of chronic harms being
deprioritized under, under this bill.
I'm interested in whether or not, uh, on your perspective on whether,
um, uh, the guidance that the health and safety
system has provided your industry, uh, in recent years
has been adequate or as good as it could be pe- um, particularly for
smaller PCBUs, because that, I think, is the...
If I could characterize the government's intent on this, they're responding to
the, you know, small PCBUs complaining about the heavy
compliance of the system.
That's the political driver for this.
Um, uh, and I wonder whether you think wh- the, whether
the system has given your industry sufficient and, and
good enough quality guidance to enable those small
PCBUs to do what's required of them.
Yeah. I guess, um, our, our world is a wee bit different with, uh, Maritime New
Zealand recently becoming our regulator.
Yeah.
We're not under the, um...
WorkSafe have issue with resourcing and capability and a whole lot of stuff
there. Maritime and, and again, port sector, through the Port Health and Safety
Leadership Group, we've created this insights work program, and a big
part of that is development of, of guidance.
Yeah.
So I guess the, the important but subtle difference is through the
PIAA, the port CEs group and the Port Leadership Group,
we have the ability to influence that guidance and create-- and the Port Industry
Association particularly, is a key developer of that guidance.
Yeah.
So it truly is industry for industry, and that's, that's a unique feature.
When I talk to non-port sector equivalents on the GM Health and
Safety circle, they don't have that freedom.
They're quite, quite impressed with how we can do what we do.
And again, it's a,
it's a feature of our relative smallness, I guess.
Only 13-
Yeah
... ports and five deliverables and so on.
We can get in a room and quite quickly agree on the key principles, so-
Right
... long-winded answer, sorry, Phil, but, um-
No
... I'd say yes. Yes.
Def-
But again, there is an area for improvement here where we get the reins a
bit more than the regulator.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, thanks for presenting to us this morning.
Um, appreciate the time you've taken.
Uh, members, we are now on-
Thank you
... a break until
10:25, so if we could be back online at
10:24, that'd be appreciated.
And members, when we start back, we're going to start with the New
Zealand Thoroughbred Racing Incorporated.
So when the clerk's ready, we can bring up
Jill Gregory.
Jill, if you want to turn on your video so we can see you and your mic so we can
hear you. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for
questions.
All right, Jill.
Good morning. I'm just
trying to see what I need to do with my computer.
Camera.
Feel free to kick off in the meantime.
Yes. Apologies.
I'm not sure why that's not working.
Don't worry about it. Just kick in-
Oh, here we go. There we go.
Yeah. Okay.
Right. Good morning, everyone.
Tēnā koutou and good morning. My name is Jill Gregory.
I am the General Manager for Legal and Compliance at New
Zealand Thoroughbred Racing.
I have with me today Rachel Brown, who's a partner at Bowery Gully,
who's assisted NZTR for many years, in relation to health and
safety. My background is not in health and safety,
and so I'll defer to Rachel if the committee's got some specific questions or
technical questions about the bill and our submission.
I'll just start with a, I'll take the submission as read, but just start with a wee
introduction, and then we'll welcome questions from the committee.
So thank you for the opportunity to be heard.
NZTR is the governing body for Thoroughbred racing in New Zealand,
and we work with race clubs and the Racing Integrity Board across the
country to regulate the sport,
support integrity, and ensure that races are conducted fairly and
safely.Our core submission is straightforward.
We support the intention of the bill as a whole, and we
consider that the proposal to clarify obligations and strengthen
the role of the approved codes of practice creates a timely and
practical opportunity for sector-specific guidance for Thoroughbred
racing and professional sport more generally.
Submission calling for this guidance arises out of the
unconventional nature of Thoroughbred racing and sport more generally.
The issue here is not where the risk exists, it plainly does,
but how those risks should be managed and where some degree of
physical risk is inherent in the activity itself.
In other words, how do we and other national sporting
organizations ensure that we are doing what is reasonably
practicable to manage risk?
So Thoroughbred racing illustrates these challenges clearly.
At an elite level, it involves high speed competition, close
proximity between horses and riders, rapidly changing
conditions, and real-time decision-making across multiple venues and
weather conditions. Our stable staff and handlers work in
close proximity to responsive animals in confined
spaces, which creates its own distinct risk
profile. The structure of our industry adds further
complexity, and this point extends probably beyond
racing into generally into sports.
If we look at, take a race day, for example, New Zealand Thoroughbred
Racing is involved in
and setting our policies, national policies and guidance
on how our race clubs who own the venues should be preparing their
race courses.
The Racing Integrity Board, who amongst other things controls the race days,
and they determine whether racing is abandoned in any particular
circumstances. Our trainers and our jockeys are each
business operators and contractors.
And the TAB NZ, who is on site, have camera operators and
towers and presenters and staff on course.
And then we have operators within the venue, such as caterers and other
contractors.
It also includes a mix of employment, contractor, and volunteer
relationships.
So this comparable complexity arises in organized sports where you see
governing bodies, clubs, organizers, coaches, contractors, support
staff, and participants, and they all play different roles in delivering
training and competition.
These features can create real uncertainty about where
duties begin and end, particularly when considering the
boundary between inherent competitive risk and preventable harm,
the management of fatigue and load, and psychosocial hazards in
high-performance environments.
So we support the proposed amendments to the ACOT framework,
particularly the proposal to allow persons or organizations such as
us to work alongside the regulators to develop and submit
draft ACOTs, and the introduction of the safe harbor
mechanism for those who are acting in accordance with those.
These changes create a timely opportunity to develop an ACOP
tailored to Thoroughbred racing and professional sport more generally.
Such an ACOP would provide clearer sector-specific guidance on managing
those inherent risks, clarify the allocation of
responsibilities among overlapping duty holders, and offer a
pragmatic and proportionate pathway to improved safety
outcomes without altering the core structure of the health and
safety regime. To be clear, NZTR is
not seeking to lower standards. Health and safety is
integral to the success and reputation of the racing industry,
and we already maintain comprehensive safety measures across the sport,
such as real-time compliance monitoring, concussion protocols,
health and safety plan requirements for license holders, education
programs, and our own mental health support program
on track, which we created with the other racing codes.
We consider that a professional sport ACOP would complement and
formalize these initiatives, providing greater certainty to duty
holders in this complex environment.
So in summary, our primary submission is that the distinct operational
context of Thoroughbred racing and professional sport more
generally warrants sector-specific guidance.
The bill gives Parliament an opportunity to support an ACOP that
expressly covers Thoroughbred racing and professional sport.
It would give duty holders clearer guidance, support improved safety
outcomes, and deliver greater regulatory certainty while leaving
the underlying legislative framework intact.
So I'll leave the presentation there and open to questions from the
committee.
Thanks very much. Our first question is from Phil Twyford.
Thank you for your submission. I hear your plea for more
and more relevant guidance.
I'm interested in how many or what proportion of
employees in your industry would be
employed by a PCBU with 20 or fewer
employees.
A significant number.
At a national level, we are over 20 as a governing body,
but individually, each racing club would be,
most of them would be under 20.
The only exception may be Auckland Thoroughbred Racing, which is a larger
organization. Even then, I think 20 might be pushing it.
Right.
And obviously, the trainers and the jockeys or individuals
or small business operators would fall under that.
Okay. So it sounds like the great majority would be in under 20s.
Correct.
PCBU. Yep. Okay. What's the situation in regards to suicide
and psychosocial harm in your industry?
There was a recognized,
I guess, problem within the industry, which extended out to the three
racing codes, the harness and greyhounds together with Thoroughbred
racing.The research that was undertaken indicated there
was increased risk within our industry for suicide and mental health
challenges. Those probably,
I think, arise from a couple of situations.
One, a number of staff within our industry work
very long hours and early mornings under a lot of pressure.
And then for our elite jockeys,
a lot of them are maintaining a low weight, they
are traveling big distances,
and so those factors in themselves create that increased
potential for risk.
The racing codes came together about three years ago and developed
a charitable company called On Track.
And that organization,
it's a suicide
prevention and mental health wellbeing organization that
now supports the three codes.
And so that
is our primary
way of helping, I guess, across the entire industry,
for all participants to access and obtain assistance through that.
And are you concerned that
this bill, if passed in its current form, would effectively
deprioritize psychosocial harm for
PCBUs with fewer than 20 employees?
I think as a general statement, I would have to agree with that.
I think within our industry, I don't think we would
deprioritize it. We see it as an incredibly important part of
supporting our athletes and participants.
So I guess I'm not concerned from my own industry's perspective,
but as a general concept, that is a potential outcome.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Jill. Thank you very much, Rachel.
That's all we have time for this morning.
Appreciate you taking the time to present to the committee.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Members, we're now moving to Jodi
Warwick-Ponga
for five minutes for an individual presentation.
Jodi, coming on.
There we go.
Kia ora.
We can see you, we can't hear you.
Okay then. Just one moment.
Now we can. There we go. Great.
Perfect. Kia ora. Tena koutou katoa, ngā mihi to the Chair and also
the members of the committee. Thank you for this opportunity to speak to my
personal submission today. Called Jodi Warwick-Ponga, tōku ingoa.
Today I would like to focus on what I've been seeing in practice and what I
believe would help. From my perspective, it's grounded in a Māori
worldview centered on whānau, hapū, iwi, and
interconnectedness and also holistic wellbeing.
I've worked in health and safety as a consultant and an adult educator
since 2008 for all industries, from small operators to
large industrial titans, in both New Zealand and also in Australia.
I also grew up in a small family construction business, so I
understand how this will impact at a ground level.
There are four points that I would like to focus on today.
The first is on critical risk and how it's understood,
where harm actually shows up, the reality for small
businesses, and implementation.
So the first is how critical risk is understood.
In practice, this will vary. Two similar
businesses or even two people within the same workplace can often look
at the same risk and come to different conclusions.
Good decision-making relies on clear information
and understanding how to apply it, and that's what enables critical
thinking. Without that, people are making calls without the
support they need, and that's where variation starts.
If the goal is clarity, then the biggest gap I see is
guidance. People need practical examples of
what good looks like in their actual context.
The second point is where harm actually shows up.
Most harm builds in the day-to-day.
Fatigue, manual handling, workload, and long-term
exposures, and how work is arranged.
These are risks people deal with every day.
They are cumulative effects, not just intermediate
or immediate ones.
When harm occurs, it does not also sit with just that
one person. It flows out to whānau, to our
hapori, or the wider community, and the wider impacts is
part of what we need to hold in view.
Now, this system shapes what gets attention.
If the focus shifts too far from those, those
everyday risks receive less attention, even though they
continue to affect the people and our workers.
My third point is small businesses.
Most are trying to make it through each day, and they want to do the right thing.
The challenge is knowing what good looks like and having the
support to
achieve it.
Clear guidance, simple tools, and training that fits how
they work will make a difference. Affordability
also supports what matters. If businesses are
expected to identify critical risk, they need to have the
capability to do that well. And my
last point is implementation. When changes come
in before guidance is ready, people work it out for
themselves. That leads to different interpretations and
confusion. If changes are coming, guidance needs to be
available at the same time. So for me, this comes back to one thing.
We are managing risk to people. From my perspective, that
reflects kaitiakitanga, which is to be stewards of our resources,
looking after people and recognizing their mana, their wellbeing, and the impact
on whānau and community. When people understand what to do and have
support to apply it well, you will have consistency and you
will see better outcomes. Ngā mihi. Happy to take questions if they allow.
Thank you so much. Phil Twyford.
Thanks, Jodi. Really thoughtful submission.
Can you just tell, what's your work?
What's your experience base for
your thoughts on all this? Yeah.
Sure. I actually work in adult education at the moment.
I am also a trustee of Te Rōpū Mātauranga o Aotearoa, which is the
Māori Health and Safety Association of New Zealand.
Mm.
They have also created or provided our own submissions.
So this is my own personal submission, and I wish to speak to that.
Mm.
I'm also studying a masters. I'm on my final year of my master's degree in
Indigenous studies, focusing on health and safety and
relational values, indigenous values, to support
less harm.
Mm. Cool. Thank you.
Awesome.
Thank you very much. Jodi, thank you for your submission and taking the time to
join us this morning. We really appreciate it.
Ka pai. Thank you.
Ka pai.
So members, now inviting OceanaGold New Zealand Limited,
to join us for their 10-minute
submission.
Next slide.
Other way.
Good morning.
Good morning. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for
questions. Over to you.
Thank you very much. I'm Alison Poole.
I'm the SVP for Legal and Public Affairs at OceanaGold across
New Zealand.
And I'm Jackie St. John, Manager of Legal for OceanaGold across New
Zealand. Mōrena.
We'll try to keep it to five minutes, with room for questions.
Thank you.
A little bit about OceanaGold. We operate gold mines
at Macraes, which is northeast Otago, just north of Dunedin,
and at Waihi,
and we have a fully restored mine at Reefton on the west coast.
Both of those mine sites have operated for over 35 years,
and between them employ 1,200 people plus several
hundred contractor companies.
We spend over $500 million annually, 80% of
that is spent in New Zealand. And of that, wages is about $180
million. So, our people represent a
significant part of our business.
We want to talk in particular about critical risk and how it's
going to be defined in this bill.
We do have a concern with that definition.
At the moment, the structure of the act is going to treat the
notion of critical risk as a catchall
definition. So that is to capture situations that aren't
expressly regulated for in the schedule, which then
cross-refers to a whole bunch of regulations,
the regulations for mining in particular in our instance, but going wider
than that to, for example, the Health and Safety and Employment
Regulations '95.
Staying with the 1995 regulations,
I want to talk about the risk associated with working at heights, because I think
that provides a bit of an example of our concern about the definition as it
stands of critical risk.
So, within the express regulatory
environment of those '95 regulations, working at
height is defined as heights of more than three meters.
So, so far so good, I think. I think most people would agree
that a fall from over three meters is likely to be
serious and could well be fatal.
But as a catchall, I think the notion of a critical
risk as a likely consequence of serious harm
or fatality or the occupational consequences that are
specified,
is setting that bar too high at that likely level.
And I think it needs to be set a bit lower to capture some of the less
obvious potential for death or serious harm.
And that's because it is supposed to be a catchall.
So an example for us would be A-frame five-rung
stepladders. So these, members of the committee would be
familiar with. They're all sold at the big box hardware stores.
They are, at this point, a banned tool on our mine sites.
And the reason for that is hard-won experience through some
serious accidents where people have sought to use those kinds
of ladders without a platform as a platform
from which to do work.
And the reality is that a fall from one meter or two meters
in that kind of situation may well cause serious
injury or could even be fatal.
And I think the statistics associated with ladders of that kind actually bear that
out.
So, with the select committee, there
has been offered, I think, a definition previously of likely to
mean probable foreseeable risk of harm, more than possible
but less than certain, and involving judgment.
And we would certainly agree that a lot of judgment is involved, and
it's difficult to remove that entirely from the workplace.
But good safety management does require eliminating judgment
where a firmer rule is warranted. And our example of the
A-frame stepladder is exactly that. It's a banned tool.
So the administrative control of judgment is really near the
bottom of the hierarchy of controls and not something that we should be
sliding back into in this country.
So we think likely is the wrong prompt for the level of control that's
required for things that could have serious consequences,
and that the current focus of the legislation, for
example, the definition of a principal hazard-In the context of
mining, that looks at the consequences and
whether there could be fatality,
multiple fatalities, whether there could be serious injury or death.
That is focused on what could happen and not the likelihood.
And that, as I say, is our hard-won experience.
So, our recommendations on this are set out in paragraph 29
of our submission, and we suggest defining
critical risk more by reference to the possible consequence
and less by reference to whether it's likely, which I think puts it too
highly. It must be,
at the very least, if you're going to bring in foreseeability, reasonably
foreseeable potential or something of that kind,
to cause serious harm or a fatality.
I'll just hand over to Jackie. I see we're running over our own imposed
time, but a couple of additional points to make.
Very briefly.
We're interested in the two-tier PCBU system.
So our mines rely extensively on contractor workforces,
including many that will be a small PCBU under the bill.
They will operate within our sites, and they'll share duties under Section
34 to consult, cooperate, and coordinate on health and safety.
For example, we have regular maintenance shutdowns for our processing plants.
That can bring over 300 contractors to sites for short periods of
time. It's a complex, high-hazard activity that has to be carefully
planned and managed. We believe Section 34's requirements must
apply consistently regardless of the size of the
PCBU, and large PCBUs like OceanaGold
must be able to retain the ability to enforce uniform safety
standards throughout our sites. Inconsistency brings
uncertainty and risk. We don't want that.
Approved codes of practice. We support the bill's proposal to
elevate approved codes of practice to safe harbor status,
provided that they have been prepared in a technically robust
way, they promote positive safety outcomes, and they demonstrate
practicable workability. So to us, there need to be some
clear requirements around WorkSafe oversight,
funding for the expertise required to get those right,
and preferably, a method to resolve conflicts
between differing ACOPS and guidelines. Thank you.
Thank you. There's a question from Phil Twyford.
Thank you for your submission, and I note your
recommendation on the point around differentiation between small
and other PCBUs, and that seems very practical. Thank you for that.
So in light of what you've said, and given that your industry
is
oftentimes sites are a high-hazard environment,
and it's an industry which relies heavily on
subcontractors,
does it make any sense in your industry for smaller
PCBUs to have a different and
substantially less onerous
set of requirements for the management of health and safety risk?
I think the difficulty a PCBU of that kind is going to face is
when they are on our site, they are subject to our rules, and it is not
going to be a lower set of standards or in any
sense a less onerous
set of rules that everyone is operating to.
So there can be some situations where
I can see that there would be onerous requirements that
weren't commensurate to the environments those PCBUs were
operating in. But it's not about the size of the PCBU, it's about
the environments they are in. So I think if there were an exception
for PCBUs where they were working on high-hazard sites or where they
were working in with other PCBUs with higher standards,
it has to be very clear that those are the standards that will apply to them.
And that's going to have to grapple with, for example, occupational risk
or occupational disease risk. So the mining
regulations require regular medicals and those kinds
of things. We have had to grapple for over 10 years with
how you operationalize that when you might have a worker
who only comes to your site once every six months for five days.
So,
there's a bit to work through on this.
But I think the principle needs to be that a worker of
any PCBU, regardless of size, needs to be protected by the same
level of protections when they are working on one of our sites or
any other site that is similar.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much for the time we've had with you this morning.
Appreciate your submission.
Thank you.
Members, we're now going to invite C3 Peterson
Group to present their submission,
at the end of which our Honorable Phil Twyford will
take the chair.
Just need to
turn your mic and your video on so we can hear you
and see you, please.
It's
not
working.
I think we can hear you now.
You can hear us. I think you can't see us.
Yeah.
Our video doesn't-
Correct
... seem to wish to work.
Okay. No worries. Just fire away with your submission in
the interest of time.
So,
I'm Dallas Tansley. I'm the General Manager of Health and Safety and
HR for the C3 Peterson Group.
I also have with me Jo Bradley, who is our lead for
health and safety systems, and David Wakelin, who is our GM of
logistics.
There are two main things that we want to focus on in this
submission. One of those is comments about the approved
code of practice,
and the other is the regulator focus.
So in relation to ACOPS, as PIA had mentioned, we are
very familiar with operating under an ACOP,
and have worked with our regulator, primarily our
regulator being Maritime New Zealand.
Under the application of the ACOP, I guess one of the
key things for us as they're being developed is
having those who have to be accountable for
the delivery under the ACOP,
having the feedback in that group very well
specified under protocols. Because one of the challenges is there are
multiple players that will contribute to the development of an
ACOP,
and if there isn't some
method of prioritizing that feedback, you can have
a potentially distorted
or weaponized view of the kinds of things that people want to see covered.
So what we're seeking or suggesting is that the consultation with
industry is what is mandated.
Obviously, the regulator worker representatives
are key because those are the ones that represent and understand
the risk. The industry itself is those who have to
apply it.
So that is, I think, a key part of the ACOP
development. The other part is what happens when you want to amend it.
And one of the things for us is to make sure that any amendment
of an ACOP is we're not getting to any level where it's exceeding the
intent of the
enactment of HSWA.
So there is a lot of iteration that occurs with an ACOP post it being
signed off or agreed to. It is what happens after that is the protocol
that we're seeking to have, I guess, more structured
protocols to it. We see potentially otherwise,
you can end up with an ACOP that well exceeds any intent of
Parliament in setting up the ACOP in the first
place.
The other part of it is that we think an ACOP
should be regularly reviewed. And I think this is a matter that the PIA has
raised, and I believe the Business Leaders Forum.
That once an ACOP is developed, there needs to be proper
process to enable that to change as there's technology or
other innovations that can come in and change the
specific parts of that ACOP that apply.
Second matter is the role of the regulator.
We support the intent to prioritize the regulatory focus to guidance,
support, and education.
Whilst we work in the port sector,
largely across maritime, we have
a lot of operations that are also
under the WorkSafe as the key
regulator.
We see that there can be differences in application
under HSWA between those two,
the main regulator and Maritime as the agency.
So in terms of the guidance before enforcement,
one of the things for us is near-miss reporting.
We want to see, I guess, stronger guidance either whether that's with
HSWA or with the regulator providing that to
highlight that near-miss reporting, especially when it's kind of a
voluntary,
I guess, approach with the regulator, that that is not subject to
enforcement action,
which it currently is.
If the intent is guidance, that the near-miss reporting, which is probably one of
the biggest opportunities for industry to learn,
is subject to guidance, engagement,
and assistance for industry as opposed to prosecution for industry,
so that that fear of that gets removed and better learning
occurs. Along with that, of course,
supporting the regulator with the right resources to be able to do that
would be a key requirement.
So those are our two major points that adds to
our prepared submission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And we'll go into any questions.
No?
No questions.
Well, thanks very much. Thanks, members.
I'm going to hand over to Phil.
Thank you.
Thank you, Carl. Okay, so we are now
moving on to
the Employers and Manufacturers Association.
Who have we got?
Paul Jarvey has joined us.
Welcome, Paul.
Are you able to turn on your camera?
Oh, yeah.
Is that all working now? Yeah. Hi, Paul.
Welcome to the-
Great
... subcommittee.
Oh, thank you.
We've got 10 minutes for your submission and any questions.
Thanks very much.
My name's Paul Jarvey. I'm Manager of Employment Relations and Safety here at EMA.
We represent over 7,000 members from Taupo North
At the outset, we want to be quite clear.
EMA broadly supports the direction and the
intent of the bill.
We support health and safety workplaces and support the reform where it
generally improves clarity, reduces unnecessary costs, and
focuses on managing critical risk.
However, our concern is that several of the bill's proposed clauses
are unlikely to achieve the Minister's stated objectives and may
instead introduce new complexity, inconsistency,
and unintended risk.
The bill represents a good moment to reflect on why we have
health and safety legislation in the first place.
The Health and Safety at Work Act establishes a minimum standard that
applies across all businesses. Those standards are designed to create
a level playing field and to protect workers regardless of where
and how they work.
Section three of the act makes it clear its purpose is to protect
workers and others by eliminating or minimizing risk arising
from work, and it requires regard to the principle that
all workers should be given the highest level of protection against harm.
Importantly, that protection is not selective.
It is not some risk, it is not some work, and it is not some
workers.
One of our issues is, is size a proxy for risk?
Our first concern is the proposed division of PCBUs into large and small,
based solely on
employee numbers. We struggle to understand how headcount
is being used as a proxy for risk.
A small four-person
abseiling or white water rafting business operates with materially
higher greater inherent risk than 125 person conducting
an accounting firm.
Yet under the bill, the smaller business may face fewer obligations,
not because the risk is lower, but because the workforce is smaller.
Risk does not scale with company size.
Using workforce numbers as a proxy differentiator
undermines the genuinely risk-based system.
Issue two, two-tier system. This leads to our
second concern, which is the creation of a two-tier system.
By carving out certain duties for small PCBUs, the bill
places an estimated
450,000 workers in a different and potentially lower protection
category.
Of particular concern is the treatment of musculoskeletal
conditions, MSEs we call them.
These result in costly times off work, with the average time
sitting around about 35 days.
We have not seen evidence that excludes this category of risk
for small PCBUs that will reduce harm.
Rather, it shifts the costs, particularly through our increased
ACC levies and by employers. At a minimum, this
raises serious policy
questions. How does this approach align with
the Act's requirements to
provide the highest level of protection to all workers?
Issue three, complexity, not clarity.
The bill was intended to reduce red tape and administrative burden,
particularly for small businesses.
In practice, we believe it may do the opposite.
Small PCBUs will need to maintain a real-time
employee headcount to retain the small PCBU
status.
They'll need to interpret and determine what constitutes a critical
risk.
They'll need to assess whether any of the ACC Schedule 2
conditions are present at a level likely to cause chronic
harm.
For many small businesses, this is additional complexity,
not simplification.
These challenges are compounded on the multi-PCBU work site,
where large and small PCBUs will operate alongside each other.
Differing duties and thresholds will introduce uncertainty around roles,
responsibilities, and coordination of risk management,
particularly upstream and downstream.
The last point is on due diligence.
We also want to highlight the proposed narrowing of officers' due diligence
duties.
While this distinction may make sense in the four directors of large
organizations, in SMEs, the line between governance
and operation is often blurred. Officers frequently
move between strategic and hands-on roles on the same
day, the same morning and afternoon.
More clarity and guidance is as needed to ensure that officers in small
and medium enterprises can understand and comply with the
obligations to confidence.
What we are asking for. In closing, the EMA strongly supports safer
workplaces, an informed and well-resourced regulator.
We welcome WorkSafe's new sector-based strategy and its focus on
practical guidance.
However, we ask the committee to consider,
one, whether PCBU size is an appropriate and effective
proxy for risk. Two, whether proposed carve-outs
are consistent with the Act's fundamental purpose of universal worker
protection.
Three, whether the bill as drafted genuinely reduces
complexity for small businesses or inadvertently increases it.
And four, whether clearer guidance is needed around officer due
diligence in SMEs context. We believe
addressing these issues will improve the
bill's effectiveness and ensure it delivers on its original
intent.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy to answer any questions.
Yeah, thanks, Paul. Question from Grant McCallum
Yeah. G'day, Paul.
G'day.
So
yeah, just following on from your comments around, your comment
about the fact that
head count shouldn't necessarily be a proxy for risk-
Mm-hmm
... it's a very good line actually.
What feedback do you get from your
SMEs about how they deal with the health and
safety issues?
Because one of the reasons I think they're trying to address here is, obviously a
very large business can employ someone, a specialist person to look after this.
Whereas a SME, it's a different ball game. Any comment?
Yes. Look, most of our members are in that SME category, and they do find it
difficult. It's difficult because of several reasons.
One is the guidance that's available to them isn't that clear.
Yes.
And it's probably rated at the higher end of the SME market to the
large businesses.
Equally, there's a lot of
advisors out there in the marketplace that overcook it.
Yeah.
So-
I've had experience with that. Carry on
... so rather than getting a fit for purpose kind of response,
they get a
A plus gold-plated version, which that's the complexity,
and the bill talks about, or the minister talks about
reducing red tape. There's nothing in the act about red tape.
It's in people's own systems, so that's where I think it gets overcooked.
So just if I may chime in.
How do you get that right then for your smaller members?
You're in a good position as-
Yeah
... overarching organization to help make it clearer for those
SMEs.
So what we do, we offer what we call very practical
solutions. So they come to us with a problem, we give them a solution
for them to go and manage, and part of that is guidance, part of
that's through training that we offer our members.
But equally, what they're also looking for from the regulator, and it's
happening now, is that when the regulator comes to site, they're not there
as the policeman initially, they're there to help.
And I've spent a lot of time with MBIE, trying to get this across the line.
So the first question that an inspector should ask is, "What can I do to help?"
Because it is complex, you're talking legalese
jargonese.
So we're hearing and seeing from our members that
that new intervention strategy by WorkSafe, it's really having
positive outcomes.
Okay. Thank you. That's good feedback. Thank you. Appreciate that.
Cheers.
Paul, we've got another couple of minutes left.
Thanks.
I just wanted to, unless colleagues have got any other questions, I wanted to ask
you,
you basically made some pretty fundamental criticisms of the bill
as it's currently drafted-
Yes
... particularly in relation to the two-tier system that it would establish
and
the use of number of employees as a proxy
for risk.
Yeah.
I mean, they go to the heart of the bill.
Correct.
If I read between the lines from your submission, are you saying
that a more effective way
to meet the bill's objectives and, in fact, the Health and Safety at Work
Act objectives, would be to revamp and improve the system of
guidance?
Have I got that right?
The guidance comes after what the act requires, because the
guidance then is directed and scoped by what the
law's going to require. So I think fundamentally we need a
universal system.
My research in writing our submission, there's no other jurisdiction around the
world that has this carve-out.
Right.
Yeah.
There are small carve-outs for small businesses, but that's in
paperwork and admin stuff, not in the actual duty of
care towards workers.
Okay.
You haven't said this in your submission, but I'm interested to know whether the
EMA
supports the passage of the bill as
drafted.
No.
Given that you've made such fundamental objections.
No. We read it very carefully
obviously. We had focus groups with our members, and just-
Yeah
... prior to this we have a
three monthly
briefing sessions with our members.
We had 1,700 members on those briefing sessions just-
Yeah
... the same time the bill
had been
released, and we heard loud and clear from them,
that they didn't want this. It didn't fit comfortably with them.
Mm-hmm.
So really we are acting on behalf of our members,
so we are the pen of our members' voice.
Okay. Thank you.
That's very helpful to the committee. Thank you.
Okay, team, it's 11:09.
Louis and Zach, do we have the Milford
Sound Tourism people ready to go?
Yes, I believe we do. They're just joining now.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Welcome, Hayley Preston from Milford Sound Tourism.
Do you want to turn your camera on for us?
Good morning.
Welcome to the committee.
Hayley, we've got 10 minutes to hear your submission, including questions.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa, Chair and members of the committee,
and thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
My name is Hayley Preston, and as its Chief Executive, I'm speaking on
behalf of Milford Sound Tourism, or MSTL.
By way of background, MSTL is the tourist infrastructure provider in
Piopiotahi Milford Sound. We operate the harbor, wharves, visitor
terminal, parking, wastewater plant, and rubbish and recycling
systems. We also license six tourist boat operators in
Milford Sound.We employ around 25 staff in
summer and 19 in winter, and many of those staff live in the Milford Sound
village in accommodation we provide.
Our submission is focused on one issue in the Health and Safety at Work Amendment
Bill, and that is the proposed Section 35.
We understand the policy intention behind the bill is to keep the Health and Safety
at Work Act focused on work-related health and safety, and not to
make it a general backstop for public safety.
We support that intention.
Our concern is that Section 35, as currently drafted, does not
properly deal with the position of private sector PCBU,
like MSTL, where the relevant issue is a natural
hazard risk, and in our case, specifically
landslide-generated tsunami risk at Piopiotahi Milford Sound.
Milford Sound is a very particular environment.
It is remote, heavily visited, and exposed to natural hazard
risks. But the legal framework for assessing and managing
those natural hazard risks sits under the emergency management legislation,
and the relevant responsibilities there lie with the Civil Defense Emergency
Management group, local authorities, and government agencies.
The problem for us is that Section 35 seems to help only where the
person with the HASWA duty is also the person subject to the
relevant external legal requirements.
In the natural hazard context, that is not MSTL.
The relevant external statutory requirements under the emergency
management legislation are imposed on public authorities, not
on MSTL as a private company.
So as currently drafted, Section 35 doesn't really solve the
overlap issue.
It leaves open the question of how a company like ours is supposed to comply with
HASWA in relation to a public safety issue that is really governed
elsewhere under a different statutory framework, the emergency
management framework.
In our view, that position is both uncertain and unworkable.
We do not think that landslide-generated tsunami hazard and risk at
Piopiotahi Milford Sound should be regulated through the Health and Safety at
Work Act. We say that for a few reasons.
First, it is not appropriate for a private sector company
like MSTL to be making public safety tolerance
risk decisions or risk tolerance decisions for one of New Zealand's most
significant tourism destinations.
Secondly, the emergency management framework, both the existing
legislation and the Emergency Management Bill Number 2, already places
responsibility on the CDEM group and local
authorities to assess and manage natural hazard risk in the area.
Thirdly,
risk communication to workers and visitors regarding natural hazards needs to
be coordinated, consistent, and authoritative.
Such communication is naturally part of the role of the relevant public
authority as part of the emergency management framework.
It should not depend on different private operators each making their own
judgments.
And fourthly, major mitigation measures like things like
evacuation routes, refuges, and other protective infrastructure
are matters for the public authorities and the central government, not for private
operators to determine or fund.
So our submission is really about ensuring that responsibility sits in the right
place. Our preferred outcome is that Section 35 be
amended so that it clearly addresses this issue for non-governmental
PCBUs like MSTL.
If that is not done, then we say
the bill should include an express provision making it clear
that the landslide-generated tsunami hazard and risk at Piopiotahi Milford Sound
is not covered by the Health and Safety at Work Act.
This is not about stepping away from safety responsibilities.
MSTL accepts its responsibilities for work-related health and safety.
What we are concerned about is the inappropriate extension of
HASWA into the area of natural hazard public safety that is already
addressed and should continue to be addressed through emergency management
legislation.
Thank you again for hearing from us.
I'd be happy to answer any questions and would also be happy to assist further
in the drafting if that would be helpful.
Thank you, Haley.
Colleagues, any questions for Haley?
So Haley, that's
extremely useful and practical submission.
You're the first submitter who's raised this particular issue with us.
Mm-hmm.
And I can say that we will ask the
officials to advise us and respond directly to the
issues that you've raised, so.
Okay. Thank you.
Yeah. Thanks a lot.
Cheers.
Okay.
Next up we've got Jessica from the New Zealand Occupational
Health Nurses Association. Hi, Jessica.
Are you able to turn on your camera?
Yes, trying.
Hello. Welcome to the committee.
Thank you. Good morning.
All right, Jessica, you've got 10 minutes for your submission, including questions.
Thank you.
Chair and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity
to speak today. Ko Jessica toku ingoa, and I'm
representing the New Zealand Occupational Health Nurses
Association, or NZOHNA.
Our association represents occupational health nurses working
across a wide range of industries throughout Aotearoa.
Our approximately 400 strong members work directly with
employees, employers, and health professionals to prevent
harm. Our submission is a practical frontline
perspective on how health and safety legislation operates,
um, in workplaces and how it affects those
peopleOverall, we support the stated
objective of the Amendment Bill to continue to reduce workplace
fatalities, injuries, and illnesses.
However, we are concerned that several of the proposed changes may in
fact weaken outcomes, particularly health outcomes for vulnerable
workers, rather than improve them.
Our members work closely with WorkSafe.
We strongly believe that effective regulation and enforcement are
essential to achieving meaningful health outcomes for our workers.
While guidance and education are important, and we very much
support the further development of approved codes of practice,
the reality is these take years to develop,
and they must not be used as a reason to
deprioritise or dilute WorkSafe's regulatory
role in the interim.
It is our members' view that WorkSafe is already under-resourced,
and further reducing compliance activity or diverting limited
resources away from enforcement risks lower compliance
overall, which ultimately leads to higher human and financial
costs through workplace harm.
The Amendment Bill also introduces a definition of critical risk
that is limited either to hazards listed in two schedules or
to hazards that are likely to cause serious harm.
It is our members' view and concern that the introduction of this concept
could have unintended negative consequences.
Firstly, the term likely is problematic in our view.
It is ambiguous and subjective, and from a work-related health
perspective, often requires a high level of specialized
knowledge to interpret. This is particularly the case
where risks relate to latent or cumulative health conditions
such as occupational lung disease, cancers,
musculoskeletal disorders, fatigue,
psychological harm.
And by focusing the legislation on a narrow set of critical risks,
there is a real danger that other risks will be seen as less important
or even acceptable.
Yet, it's well evidenced that these so-called
non-critical risks contribute significantly to
long-term illness, reduced capacity for work, and pressures
both financial and workforce on our country's health and
social support systems.
We also want to emphasize that poor health and safety performance almost
always shows up well before serious harm occurs.
Things like musculoskeletal injuries, stress, fatigue,
sprains. By narrowly targeting critical consequences,
we are concerned that the early warning signs, the less critical
outcomes from what might be deemed less critical risks, will
be at best undervalued or at worst
accepted when it is these early warning signs that
should trigger stronger risk management and intervention before that
critical event occurs.
However, NZOH&S's highest level of concern
lies in the proposed creation of a lower tier of health and
safety requirements for small businesses, where only critical risks must
be managed.
Many of our most vulnerable workers are employed in SMEs,
including migrant workers, young people, Māori, Pasifika,
the very groups already disproportionately affected by poor health
outcomes in Aotearoa. Creating a lower bar
risks normalizing poorer health and safety practice within small businesses,
and it also opens the door for businesses to intentionally manipulate
workforce arrangements to remain within the lower obligation category.
This is especially problematic given the aforementioned vulnerable
workers are already more likely to be employed in seasonal or
temporary roles with fluctuating workforce numbers.
Our view is simple:
all workers should be able to go to work and expect to come home healthy,
safe, and free from harm, both physical and
psychological, and a worker's right to a healthy and safe place of
work should not depend on the size of the business that employs
them. In summary, NZOH&S
recommends that the committee ensures approved codes of
practice are developed before legislative changes are enacted,
invest in WorkSafe's compliance and enforcement capability,
remove the concept of critical risk from the legislation,
remove lower tier health and safety requirements for small businesses.
We'd also like some evidence that the adoption of this Amendment
Bill to essentially reduce unnecessary compliance
costs will not shift these costs from businesses onto the country's already
pressured health systems long term.
And we would also like to recommend the establishment of a
robust process for the identification, reporting, and
ongoing monitoring of occupational disease, because as we
know, workers are 15 times more likely to die from
a work-related disease than from a workplace accident.
So in closing,
it is imperative that legislation protects workers in less
responsible workplaces, and there's a very real concern that the
proposed changes we have highlighted will allow some businesses
to take advantage of this to do worse and not better.
If the true objective of this bill is to improve worker health outcomes
and safety outcomes, then the focus must be on strengthening risk
management skills, not narrowing definitions or lowering
expectations.
As it stands, the bill allows risk to become selective and
open to interpretation, and we know it will be the
workers who bear the consequences of that
mismanagement.Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Jessica.
In your view, do you think the bill as drafted, if
passed, would reduce, increase, or
leave unchanged the incidence of fatalities and workplace injuries?
Well, I think when we're talking about
all workplace fatalities, particularly those
from health risks, absolutely, I think it
will increase fatalities. We already
don't have a good visibility on what's actually happening.
And already, even though we know that health risks
are proportionately more likely to harm and kill
our workers,
there's no
real emphasis on that
in the legislation at the moment. So I think these
proposed changes will make that situation worse, and we
really need to be tightening that up.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Question from Mike Davidson.
Kia ora. Thanks, Jessica. I was going to ask a similar question, but a little bit
broader, actually. And
the
bill as currently drafted, if it did pass, would we see an
increase in harm in the workplace
from it?
My view is yes,
particularly with the small businesses,
the changes to watering down the risk management there,
the focus on the critical risks as well.
I think it really misses the boat for all risks
and misses the opportunity for
increasing
not just compliance, but the intention of workplaces to do better by
their people in those smaller businesses.
It gives them an out, basically.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you Jessica for joining us. Appreciate your submissions.
Thanks.
Okay, up next we've got the Business Leaders Health and Safety Forum,
and that is Sheridan Broadbent,
and joined by Francois Barten and Paul Goodhew.
Welcome.
Kia ora.
Yeah. Thanks for coming along, and the floor is yours.
You've got 10 minutes, including questions.
Well, look, kia ora, select committee. Thanks for having us.
We're here today on behalf of the Business Leaders Health and Safety
Forum because this bill is important to us, important to us as business leaders,
but also as New Zealanders. The forum is New
Zealand's largest chief executive membership group.
Our 440 plus chief executive members
employ
up to 25% of New Zealand's workforce.
My name's Francois Barten, I'm forum chief executive, and I'm really
thrilled to have with me my chair, Sheridan Broadbent, an
independent director and experienced infrastructure
executive,
and forum independent director, Paul Goodhew,
who for his day job is chief executive of Claris,
a significant New Zealand energy company.
This bill's important to us because work-related harm is costing New Zealand
conservatively $5 billion a year in direct cost, direct
cost of harm, but also a huge
loss of wider productivity at a time when, as a country,
growth is really an imperative at a national level.
We know we can do better. We can just look over to Tasman
to see what a genuinely shift in performance looks like.
When my daughter enters the workforce next year as a 20-year-old,
she's one and a half times more likely to be killed at work here than in Australia,
let alone what she'll get paid. So we have an imperative to close the
gap, not only with Australia, but for our people here and our businesses here
today. So as with many submitters
over your last two days of hearings, we support the intention of the
bill
to reduce harm, but also the importance
of reducing unnecessary compliance, cost, and burden.
That's sensible.
But through a range of consultation methods with members and direct submissions
from our members to us, I know our CEO members are concerned that the
proposal to allow small businesses to only manage critical
risk actually risks doing the opposite.
So as I indicated, I'm really pleased to have Sheridan and Paul with me because
both Sheridan and Paul sit in the hot seats of New Zealand
business, and have experience across both sides.
So I'm going to pass on to them, Sheridan first, and then we'll move on to
Paul.
And we look forward to the opportunity for having questions subsequently.
So Sheridan, over to you.
Thanks, Francois, and kia ora koutou to Minister Twyford and the
committee. It's fantastic to be here, so thank you for the time slot we've been
allocated.
Just here to really strengthen some of the messages that we put together
in our submission, which is reflective of the views that we sought from our
members.
So firstly, the focus on critical risk is welcome.
This is taking us in the right direction, and it makes sense that the more
material risks get the more material attention.
The proposed definition of critical risk is ambiguous and
complex.
I think it is unhelpful to the objectives of the changes to
the bill to reduce harm, and we have provided some
suggestions in our submission as to how that could be
strengthened.
The small business carve-out
creates a lot of complexity and a two-tier system of
protection, and I just want to-Reinforce some of
the points that Paul Jarvey made in his previous submission with
MA around the fact that this is pretty
inequitable, and to have a system
where some workers are protected more than others because of who they work for, I
think is unacceptable. It's also out of alignment with good
practice anywhere in the world, based on our own review.
And certainly in checking in with our
colleagues at the UK regulator, they're really scratching their heads to understand
why we would go down this path.
We're also concerned with the small business carve-out, that it's actually going to
increase ACC costs and lower productivity,
and we are all here for a high-performance New Zealand.
Our fear, and one that we know ACC shares, is that dropping the bar for small
businesses creates a real likelihood of increasing injuries from
non-critical risks. And look, we've had an independent
economist run a ruler over some of the numbers.
And just as one interesting fact,
those businesses that would be covered by this carve-out have a
24% higher injury rate than businesses that are not.
So we're already suffering from high injuries in that area.
So,
I just question
why this is a good idea.
The team actually wanted me to explore the notion of further analysis with you guys
a little bit more.
But I guess from my perspective,
rather than
going into it, I just don't think this is a good idea.
It's way out of line
with international good practice.
It's going to create complexity and unfairness for workers,
and actually a bit of complexity for small businesses themselves,
and create impost and friction for large employers and
PCBUs as well.
Strengthening the role of co-designed ACOPS is a really
good move, so we're delighted to see that in there.
However,
they do take a long time, as has been noted in a previous submission,
and we need to be resourced to keep them current.
We've got ACOPS that are already out there that are non-current.
And again, this is not acceptable.
We need to get a move on and make sure we've got the resourcing in
WorkSafe, and that industry is leaning into this
to get these ACOPS developed and then make sure that they maintain
currency and relevance. This is a key message.
So this is a really strong idea from this bill, but we have to resource
it, and there has to be public oversight of the performance of the system
getting a move on with this. And I've got to say, on behalf of the Forum, we will
be all over this,
scrutinizing how this is performing.
And also, we will be all over our own members to make sure that we are
doing our part in terms of contributing to these.
So this is one we want to hold hands with you on, and we want it to be successful.
It has to be successful.
So look, I'm going to pass over to Paul Goodhew, chief executive of
Claris, one of New Zealand's largest energy groups, and he is one of my
board colleagues at the Forum.
Thank you, Sheridan, and thank you for your time.
So for those of you who don't know what Claris is, so we look
after the gas transmission pipelines.
We also own what will be New Zealand's largest solar farm.
We own
Rock Gas, which is New Zealand's LPG distribution network, and we
own an electricity distribution business as well.
So we employ about 500 direct staff.
But I will be clear that most of the work that is probably done for us is done
by entities that would meet the definition of being a small business.
We employ a lot of small business companies, from lawnmowers to
tree trimmers to all sorts of manner of organizations in
between. And I just listened to the submission before,
and the submitter said the small company
exclusion gives them an out, and I guess I just want to be clear
that I don't believe it does. When we employ contractors to
work for us, we take responsibility for their health and safety performance,
and at times we've been held responsible for that legally.
If we're employing small businesses and they have a different
obligation about health and safety from what we have,
we will roll down our expectations to them.
We will set our contracts up in such a way
that all businesses, be they small or otherwise, will be
required to deal with all of their health and safety risks, focusing
on their critical risks, but not just their critical risks.
The issue that I believe potentially this amendment
creates is, A, I may not wish to employ small companies.
I may go out of my way to avoid employing small companies.
If I do employ small companies, I will contractually obligate them to deal with
all of their health and safety issues.
Where I deal with other large employing organizations
who are
potentially dealing with this issue, they have said that they will also probably
try to roll down their health and safety obligations.
Now, we may share the same lawyers, but I doubt that we will have the same
contract.
So what we're trying to achieve in terms of reducing complexity
may not actually happen as 10 different employing entities
roll down, in slightly different versions, their obligations onto
their subcontractors.
So I think that the challenge we have is we're trying to reduce
complexity, but we risk increasing it.
We are very excited about the potential for
reduced compliance burden, not just on
small businesses, but on all
businesses. But I think that the best way to do that, and I've seen that in
the amendment with the ACOPS, is to provide
Quality guidance and compliance pathways to provide some clarity
about what is good, and right across the
organizations to make sure that everyone knows how to deliver on what is good.
I don't think any organization in New Zealand
wants to harm their workers or the people who work for them.
Everyone wants people to go home unhurt, and that requires the
entire system to work in alignment.
Having different cars driving on the road, some having to
stop at traffic lights, but others not, it just creates
problems with the whole health and safety system.
Thank you for the chance to present today.
It is, as Francois said, really important to our organization and the
organizations we represent that health and safety performance in New Zealand
improves, and I look forward to taking any questions that you may have.
Thank you very much. Very compelling oral and written
submissions. Very valuable to the committee. Thank you.
Question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Good morning, everyone. That's very helpful.
You highlighted in your presentation that
SMEs already are at higher risk, right?
It was at 24%, I think, was the measurement used
of accidents and so forth. So what is the solution from your
perspective to improve the performance of SMEs?
So look, I might field the question initially, and Sheridan and Paul, you just-
Yep
... you chip in as required. I think
this bill is in response to New Zealand's health and safety performance continued
to go sideways, which includes small businesses being at the front of the wrong
queue in terms of rates of injury.
Yep.
What we
didn't learn between 1992 and Pike River exploding was putting
in high level legislation and not fleshing it out with good clarity of
expectations, as Paul indicated before, is a recipe to disaster.
The national lead independent review identified that we needed to close that
gap and implement-
Mm-hmm
... proper solutions back in 2013/14, and again,
we failed to do that.
Yep.
So what we need is a network of good standards, of good
guidance, of approved codes. And so I think we've said
it before, and we've failed to implement.
As Sheridan and Paul both indicated, I think approved codes and other supplementary
guidance, plus a present suitably resourced
regulator, basically give people the confidence of what's
expected, but also the useful incentive that if you're putting the effort in,
you're not going to get undercut by a competitor that's not.
And I think they provide really, really clear signals.
Sheridan indicated we've been talking to some colleagues overseas.
The one thing that a senior official in the health and safety
regulator in the UK said to me when I asked her what would be one thing
I should take back to New Zealand from the UK, "Do not
prescribe."
Don't prescribe. The moment you prescribe, whether it's a list in Schedule
1A around critical risk or who needs to do what, what
happens is you shift the ownership from the business that creates the risk to
government telling business what to do.
And that just basically creates a cycle of chasing our tail.
So I think we need to follow through and do what's worked in Australia and in the
UK especially, and provide a proper suite of maintained
and stewarded documents of standards and approved codes.
Sheridan or Paul, any additional?
Yeah. I just want to add to that, and this is perhaps going back to something Paul
said in the EMA verbal submission.
He made a comment about
small businesses getting professionals in, and they feel that things are being
over-egged. And I think the role of the regulator should also be
to provide high-quality guidance for small businesses to put things into
perspective for them.
I think that is certainly something that needs to be sufficiently
resourced so that small business is getting what they need,
without us having to make a regulatory exclusion.
Okay. All good there, Grant?
Yep.
Great.
Let me just finish with this.
Would you recommend, based on your submission and what you've told us today, that
the bill in its current form should be passed into law?
My view is in its current form, it will have a whole bunch of unintended
consequences.
We surveyed members, and there was a material
rate of skepticism that we would achieve a reduction in harm.
There was skepticism that we would reduce complexity
or cost.
So in the current form,
we would struggle to support the bill, but there is scope within it to find
some things that could make a material difference.
I think if I was to make a final point, it would
be, in our submission on the policy consultation, and I know a
bunch of others, you've got to make sure you're fixing the right problem.
I don't think the legislation is the issue.
It's its implementation that is where the secret lies.
And so there are some things in here we can make progress on, but the
measure, as Sheridan said, that we will be watching is how do we implement
and not drift off and lose focus and attention.
And so all parties in the House have a critical role along with business and
others to ensure we stay on this. Because as long as you have people
doing work with business, there is risk,
and there is $5 billion reasons a year that we could do a lot, lot more with here
than injure people.
Sure. Thank you very much for your submission, Francois, Sheridan,
and Paul. Much appreciated.
Thank you. Appreciate the opportunity.
Thank you, everyone.
Cheers.
Okay. Next one up is, is it
Karen Beattie who's addressing us from the Safety Council Trust?
The written submission-
Oh, Chair
... is from Virginia Beattie.
Yeah. I think Virginia is an individual submitter
Okay. Unrelated to the... Oh, yeah, sorry.
Okay, I see. Sorry, I was misreading the agenda. Okay. Is Virginia joining us?
Yes, she is. Hi, Virginia. Welcome to the committee.
Can you turn your camera on?
Kia ora koutou. I hope you can hear me.
Hi, Virginia.
We can hear you fine. Welcome to the committee.
You've got five minutes, including time for questions.
Yes, I know. Such a short time, Phil. So I'll try and be quick.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm here as an individual, but I come with eight or nine years
working within ACC in their injury prevention
workplace team to really try and figure out what can we do
within New Zealand to improve our health and safety performance.
And we did a lot of work trying to explore that.
You would've heard earlier in one of the submissions from Mike O'Brien about the
FutureSafe Aotearoa work. But anyway, fundamental for me,
and Francois mentioned it, we'd adopted the ROBINS Act, but
we didn't implement the ROBINS system.
So we didn't create the modernized regulations, we didn't
maintain ACOPS, we didn't build the sector capability, and
WorkSafe became the default for everything.
And so that's why we're in the current state where we are, where we are way
behind Australia and the UK, where they did
implement the full operating system.
Mm-hmm.
And we've heard on lots of submissions that small businesses,
it's not an act issue for them, it's a guidance issue.
They just want clear guidance. They don't have the capability or the capacity, so
they just, "Tell me and show me what we really need to do." But it's not from
everyone. They want it from trusted partners that
understand them and their business.
So you've already heard from organizations like Safer Farms,
CHASNZ, and ShopCare.
Now, they're doing exactly what the ROBINS model envisages.
So we need these groups.
We have not yet equipped them, though, with the mandate or the
sustainable funding required to operate
within a functioning ROBINS system.
So I'm advocating for complimentary
legislative change.
So these three changes I think should make a material
difference. One of them, set up an industry-led
commissioning agency that provides the backbone to the ROBINS system,
that's aligning investment,
maintaining national consistency, and supporting the sector
specific agencies to do their jobs well.
And second, get accredited sector specific health and
safety agencies to lead the harm reduction in ACOPS, so it's not all
up to the regulator to do all this. And thirdly, create a
sustainable levy funding so guidance remains current,
consistent, and industry-led. In other words, create an infrastructure
that's genuinely by the industry, for the industry.
So in summary, the proposed changes to the legislation, in my view,
will not achieve the outcomes the government's seeking.
They adjust parts of the act, but they don't address the
fundamental system architecture that's held New Zealand
back for so long.
So fully implementing the ROBINS model is where we need to go,
and supporting that with legislative architecture that supports a
by industry, for industry approach, where we bring strong
sector capability, shared learning across those sectors,
and guidance that's current, consistent, and trusted.
That's me. Did I get it within the three minutes or four minutes, Phil?
You certainly did. There's one minute, I think, for questions.
Colleagues, any questions for Virginia?
Grant?
You're on mute, Grant.
Do you get fined for that?
Yeah, depends if it's a regulator or the agency. Anyway.
In all seriousness, so what you're saying is
you think then the regulators should literally just do the enforcement.
Is that what you're saying? Have a separate-
No, they'll need to provide a quality role and that quality assurance role.
Yeah.
I'm not saying they're out of it to-
Yeah
... totally, but I think we've missed the opportunity
in our legislative framework to strengthen the by industry,
for industry model. You heard it from the ports guys, didn't you?
Yeah. Yeah, we did.
You brought the industry along with the regulator, and
potentially with the insurer, even, in New Zealand, and actually
collectively come up with where are our priorities, where are our
gaps in the system, and allow those accredited
industry groups to really drive and work with the industry to create
the guidance that they need. And remember, when we're talking about guidance, that
on its own isn't going to make the difference.
You have to work with them, create that leadership and
that behavior change. It takes time and work, but I think
you'll see by evidences of like ShopCare and CHASNZ,
there's inklings there of really good impact and
benefit from having groups like them mandated in the
system to provide that guidance.
Okay. Thank you. That's very helpful. Thank you.
Thanks, Virginia. Very clear submission. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Okay.
We are running a little bit ahead of time.
Ana, we've got Karen Beattie with us. That's great.
New Zealand Safety Council Trust. Karen, welcome to the subcommittee.
Good morning. My name is Karen Beattie.
I'm the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Safety Council.
And-
Fantastic
Hi.
Karen, you've got 10 minutes, including questions.
Absolutely.
We've had a range of different people from across industry
share their views, so I'll be making their collective
views known in this
segment.
So I represent the New Zealand Safety Council.
We're a non-profit organization comprising of health and safety generalists
across all industries in New Zealand and Australia.
Our professional practice
covers not just high-risk industries, but most of the
small to medium enterprise. We're a member of HAZARDs and
INPTOH, who are the international network of health and safety professional
organizations. As a charitable organization staffed by
volunteers, we do not have the resource to have paid
professionals lobby loudly, so when we do express a public view,
it's because we believe it really matters.
Our view, through the lens of experienced, qualified, and registered safety
professionals, is that this Amendment Act in its current form has
such issues that it ought not to progress without some amendment
to itself and budgeted resourcing of national safety system key
enablers such as WorkSafe, HAZARDs, and technical
safety organizations. In our written submission, we
identified these issues, and they centered around five main areas.
In its current form, the Amendment Act removes existing worker
protections. It creates a two-tier system based on a business's
number of staff. Ironically, such small businesses,
such as family farms or tradespeople, will be more likely to harm their own family
members and/or staff members critical to their business and
its continuity if it's applied. It focuses on
defined critical risk, which implies we all know every
hazard and can list them in their controls.
This can prove complex, prevents continual improvement, and accepts
life-altering harm as deemed below the critical risk
line as just par for the course. It also focuses on
ACOPS. In a well-resourced safety system,
these would have already been developed by WorkSafe as an operational matter.
Of course, to be effective, they must be current, meet or exceed international
best practice, and be maintained or continuously improved as
technology and knowledge improves.
As you've already heard, there are not that many of them in place at the
moment, and those that are developed have relied on the goodwill and gifting of
time and expertise by industry groups such as ours.
The Amendment Act has significant
system-level implications. Firstly, it moves the goalposts
without extra resources. Targeted improvements to national safety
guidance capability and support would provide better regulatory
stability to our industry.
Secondly, the courts, the national health system, and
ACC will be state industries left to pick up
the bill on behalf of taxpayers. Ironically, the
second order on the business is to assess the increasing level of
uncertainty of what good looks like, reducing business
continuity and capability, and increasing ACC fees and
taxes.
I've listened to the previous submissions, and these seem to be commonly held
themes arrived at independently by both technical experts,
industry groups, and indeed, as the ladies from Safer Farms had
explicitly said, "Expect harm on the
farm to increase."
The ministers outlined that the aims of the Amendment Act are to
shift the legislation towards managing critical risks rather than
do all risks. We would argue that the existing act
and WorkSafe prosecution guidelines do this already.
Businesses with fewer than 20 workers will have overall regulatory
burden eased, but this would essentially just shift
what's reasonably practicable to a defined hierarchy of
controls. This is not a burden of doing business, but it's a
critical part of doing business, and they should be left to do it themselves.
Better defining director and
officer duties to reduce overcompliance in governance role
simply provides a get out of jail free card for directors and boards
who pay to provide governance. When boards hold managers to
account for financial performance
but not safety performance, an imbalance of priorities will occur, as we
saw at Pike River.
Clarification that land occupiers, for example, farmers,
generally do not owe safety duties to the people using their land for
recreation unless it's linked to a business activity is something that was
already clarified in case law as with the owners of Whakaari
White Island.
Approved codes of practice offer a safe harbor, yet they themselves may
not be effective. Additionally, as with any administrative
control, they must be supervised.
And lastly, that WorkSafe is directed to prioritize education,
guidance, and critical risks is over
purely punitive enforcement surely is an operational resource
matter. A law change in itself does not increase a limited
operational budget that currently constrains WorkSafe.
New Zealand Safety Council has always been and remains available
to provide technical and real-world advice as to how to
improve the national safety system, and we would advocate for a National
Health and Safety Advisory Board as an independent
statutory body to provide advice to the minister for policies,
resourcing, international best practice, emerging trends, and
ideas to improve national capability.
We remain confident that this cross-party committee has
the best interests of New Zealand at heart and urge that the dominant
views expressed during this consultation process are incorporated
into improving our rates of harm, reducing the true cost of
harm, and prioritizing workplace health and safety, which ought to see
significant changes to this bill should it progress.My
final point is that it's an inevitable conclusion
through ACC being overburdened and then
following that, after the implementation of the legislation,
workplace injuries that would increase will lead to a natural
privatization of a workers' comp system similar to that of
Australia.
The effect of private insurance on small business would mean that a
premium cost and policy stipulations would increase their overall
cost and compliance complexity in the long term, as
we see with construction fire insurance policies now.
Ironically, that's the result, which is the antithesis of
Minister Van Velden's stated intent with this amendment.
Thank you. Do you have any questions?
Thanks, Karen.
Let me ask one. Is the Safety Council aware
of any other jurisdiction
in the world that has carved out small and medium
enterprises,
and given them a more weaker or
lower set of requirements in terms of minimizing the risks to
people at work?
While I'm not a legal expert, I'm not aware of that specific
stipulation. I think it comes down to the test of
culpability and all practicable steps.
Therefore, if the knowledge and the scale of the business and a genuine effort
were made by a small business to manage risk and prevent harm to their
employees, I would understand that in places such as the UK,
the culpability placed on the small business owners would be
limited.
Hmm, interesting. Okay. Thank you.
Anyone else, questions?
Okay, thanks for joining us, Karen. Great submission. Oh, so Mike's got a question.
Thanks.
I guess just a question, part of the objective is to reduce some of
the unnecessary costs, but do you see a risk of that cost then being transferred
to the health system?
Oh, absolutely. I think,
just looking at the volume of injuries which already
exist and are disproportionately contributed by small business
who are poorly managing safety outcomes, which by the way, are
not difficult. It's just that they're constrained from obtaining quality
advice because in New Zealand there is no bar to calling yourself a safety
professional or a safety person, and there absolutely should be,
which is what ourselves and HAZARNS are all about.
But,
essentially, businesses can
manage their risk and minimize their cost by actually thinking about
the risks that they can contribute and the injuries that are likely to happen.
Where they don't do that, there would essentially be a flooding of
small injuries from small businesses, which inevitably, in my view, would
overwhelm ACC and would then lend us towards
a private health insurance system.
And if you draw that to its natural conclusion, effectively that
would mean more complexity and stipulations for the small businesses because they'd
then be at the mercy of the insurance companies who know nothing about their
business. Additionally, I would assume that their premiums would increase
every time they hurt somebody, and then the taxpayer would foot the bill
every time those insurers declined a claim for workers' injuries.
Excuse me.
Thank you.
Thanks for joining us, Karen.
Okay, so, next up is Productive Safety Limited.
Louie, do we know if they're
ready to join us now?
I believe they are.
Okay.
Hello, Diane. Welcome to the subcommittee.
Hi, Minister Twyford. Thank you. Sorry, I was having some technical difficulties
there. First time task.
No worries.
You've got 10 minutes to make your submission, including time for questions.
Thank you. So firstly, thank you for the opportunity to present the oral
submission. So I'm Diane Archand.
I'm the CEO of a small safety consultancy, trading as Nextera.
I specialize in contemporary safety practices and knowledge.
I've got 25 years in the health and safety wellbeing field,
and I've worked across different organizations and industries in that
time. I have also provided a supplementary paper which supports this
oral submission. I'm not too sure if you've received that yet.
And I'll take the written submission as
read.
We have received it.
Thank you.
Yep.
Thank you. So I'm going to start with a lived experience, which is
from a post project review that I was involved in from a machine
operator.
"The thing I'm struggling with is that why did someone have to die for this to
happen? That's the bit that just doesn't sit right.
We all said things before. It's not like no one noticed, but nothing
changed, not until after. Feels like the system only
listens after something goes wrong or someone gets hurt bad.
We've had near misses, but this one, it was like it took someone dying
for people to pay attention. Even now, I wonder if they really see us
or if it's just the paperwork that got better."
This is one person's lived experience, but not one
individual story. And where I work with small
businesses and frontline workers, I can change out the players
and the context, and I have the same narrative, and that's
actually one of lost opportunity and potential rather
than just the prevention of harm.And so with my company, which
specializes, like I said, in contemporary safety, when we think about
risk, we see that as the ISO 31000
definition, which is the effect of uncertainty on objectives,
and that includes risks, but also opportunities.
And so our submission is based on the opportunities that the bill
represents and the potential that could be lost to New Zealand workplaces
and workers if we didn't move ahead and take this opportunity.
So I'm focusing on three key areas.
The critical risk focus and prioritization, the small
business carve-out, and, ACOP and orders in
council and Schedule 1A as collective, those
elements.
So we support the purposes change,
because the wording that it's changed to prioritize-
prioritizes the critical risk that arises from work, also
acknowledges that critical risk and those
things that affect
good outcomes or poor outcomes when, working in the
workplace, develops with the conditions that are present
as well. And so by this focus, because we know
that essentially every small business and every worker
has limited capability, time, and resources, it allows
them the ability to actually
move into that place where they can actually have good conversations
that are relevant and meaningful to them.
When we're focused also on that critical risk, we're able to
understand the deeper con- contributing con- conditions
that are there. Those, what I've seen in my
experience, are psychosocial elements as
well as physical elements, as well as those health-related
issues. And spending time deeper having that conversation is
important. The third element there is that there
is an acknowledgement that with limited resources, there
are workers who deal with higher energy risks than others,
and it's those people that we do need to start listening to.
So we, we, we actually believe that this focus and
risk actually will direct attention to where it needs to be for our most
vulnerable,
and provide them the support and space to actually have good
conversations.
Moving on to the small business carve-out, I think that's probably the biggest hot
potato.
I know that there have been, and valid, valid as well, concerns
around creating a two-tiered system which erodes,
our workers'
protection.
But as we see it, there is actually already
two tiered systems in there. And if we go back to the
lived narrative, we can hear that.
There are different needs depending on where you sit in the system.
And so by actually pulling it out and confronting what already
resi- exists in reality,
we can have a different conversation, where we actually all come to the
table with acknowledgement that that actually exists
already.
So the real opportunity
here is to move from just the three Cs,
consult, cooperate, and coordinate, and that's still the linear,
essentially power imbalance that we see now, into a
partnership where we're acknowledging and understanding that
the needs in terms of where you sit within that supply
chain structure actually differ.
Because people at the frontline, what they
need to do when we still hand them the residual risk, because every
system still has residual risk in it, we need to understand
that they need a different capability and a different way of dealing with that
risk, which might not necessarily be the risk-averse way
that we deal things,
deal with things at the moment. That would be an expansion to understanding that
potentially they need risk capability.
And I think Virginia spoke a little bit earlier about the fact
that that is a different capability that we need to build, and that might not
exist within our small businesses at the moment.
But this gives us an opportunity to work in a partnership.
That point of difference may also help us deliver worker engagement,
participation, and representation a little bit differently.
But to really focus on that point of difference from an enablement
perspective, because the resources that small businesses have
or our workers have is very different from the resources of those up the
chain who can devote more time to this.
When they're starting to understand those conditions that,
increase or decrease the likelihood of an
error-likely situation for workers,
they can put money into that and enable the system.
Taryn, I've got to... Let me just interrupt you there. Sorry.
I just wanted to let you know you've got only a few minutes left for questions.
Okay. Thank you.
In case you want to take questions.
Thank you.
Sure.
And the last thing are, is around the Robbins framework.
So when I look at the Robbins framework and the foundation,
it's about self-regulation by and with those
closest to the risk.
And so being able to have that point of difference, saying, "Actually,
we do have different needs. We would like to self-regulate.
We need to be supported to self-regulate," I think that's
important. And then finally with our accredited,
the ACOPS and the, in council,
orders in council in Schedule 1A, this is a good place for us to
start because we need to shift both our,
the system and also the people in the system to become
more capable and to learn together.
In 1992, as Virginia had pointed out previously, we didn't lift
capability. In 2015, we didn't go strong enough
with worker engagement.And in 2026, we now have the
opportunity to lift capability and shift the system at the same time.
So Schedule 1A is a really good start point,
and the ACOPS allow us to potentially move into where our industrial relations
colleagues have been before with the multi-employer and
multi-union perspective bringing all to the table.
So the changes could provide a balanced framework where New Zealand is cognizant of
both opportunities and threats. There are four
recommendations that we made in terms of strengthening what the
bill can achieve. But we support the
bill because we believe it creates new opportunities.
Thank you.
Thanks, Diane. Any questions, colleagues?
Okay. Very clear submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right. Next up we've got the Ports of Auckland,
and we have Rob Mair joining us. Hi, Rob. Welcome to the subcommittee.
Good morning. Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.
Yeah, looking forward to hearing from you.
You've got 10 minutes including questions.
Thank you, Chair.
So yeah, my name is Rob Mair. I'm the General Manager of Health, Safety and
Wellbeing at the Port of Auckland.
I'll take the submission as read. I'm sure you may well have some
questions, so I want to make sure you've got time to ask those.
The Port of Auckland,
as I think well-known, had a
troubling history when it comes to occupational health and health and safety.
It's also a story of the transformation over the last four and a half
years of really building leadership capability,
through improving the relationships with our trade unions, and with
our workforce.
So some real lived experience of yes,
what does good look like?
The Port of Auckland is supportive in some areas
of the bill, and unsupportive in a few
others. Supportive insofar that we agree that
the prioritization of critical risks is key,
as I'm sure you're probably hearing some themes from the submissions
today. Ensuring that there's the right definition of critical risk
is going to be key for driving consistency.
One of the issues around critical risk is that they sometimes do appear
infrequently,
so including likelihood in the
critical risk definition is, I think, inherently problematic.
Not supportive of the small PCBU
carve-out.
I think that actually wouldn't
achieve the goal of reducing
burden. I think it just essentially the practical implication from that
is that it would shift the burden of compliance onto larger
PCBUs.
Very rarely do we find small organizations working in isolation.
They're normally part of some kind of contracting chain.
Certainly here at the Port of Auckland, we have over 700 small
organizations that come and do work here.
We wouldn't countenance
a two-tiered system,
because those risks are shared, and so we need to make sure there is a common
standard. Small PCBUs would simply look to us to meet the
compliance cost, that we would then introduce through our contractual
standards.
The last point I'd like to make is around
industry-led approved codes of practice,
which we are also very supportive of.
A consideration that I'd ask the committee to think about is
the resources that's needed to achieve that goal.
I think it's very welcome that those closest
to the work would be involved in defining what good looks like, so
industry representation in
writing approved code of practices are key.
The partnership that would be needed between
PCBUs and the regulators that just
existed
successfully with the ACOP for the ports
sector needs to be replicated and making sure that
we've got a way of defining
where those resources come from will be key to enabling
industry approved codes of practice to be successful.
If we simply rely on discretionary effort, I think it would take a very long
time to get where we want to be.
Very happy to answer any questions that you may have.
Thanks, Rob.
I will take the opportunity to go first.
So
in the Ports of Auckland's own case,
if the bill was to be passed, in its current form with the
SME carve-out, so I gather what you're saying is
that, you would effectively ensure that in your workplace,
all of the smaller contracting firms would meet your
standard of health and
safety-
Yeah
... management and that you would do that through the way that you
contract with them.
Yeah.
Is that right?
That's correct.
Would it introduce in your context,
cost or complexity in any significant way, or are you confident you could just
manage it without significant extra hassle?
I think it probably would. It would be additional
cost and complexity for the Port of Auckland and less for the small
PCBUs.
Mm.
I think for us, it would cause complexity with the overlapping duties
that are already quite difficult to manage.
Yeah.
Very rarely do we have situations
where-A small organisation works
completely in isolation and doesn't-
Mm
... affect the work
which is happening around it. So-
Yep
... we would always seek to achieve consistency in terms of
competence, capability, segregation, things
like that. For us, it would require
additional resources to ensure that our own internal
standards are-
Mm
... are being met. The other issue there is that it does
potentially result in a risk towards, it drives inconsistency
where we'd want to have commonality.
Mm.
So the Port of Auckland might decide the contractual minimum standards that we
want all of our small PCBU's to meet would be X.
Some other organizations might decide differently, and actually you're just
placing the burden of that compliance onto larger
PCBU's,
where currently it sits at that regulatory level
across all organizations.
Mm.
Grant, I'll come to you. We've got plenty of time.
So,
as a follow-up to that, Rob, Ports of Auckland's become a leader in health and
safety in a relatively short period of time.
And as you alluded earlier, from
being in quite a different place a few years ago.
Mm-hmm.
And so you could have confidence in managing this in your
site,
I would think. But if you
imagine you were the regulator,
or the policymaker, and you look around your
industry and in other industries, what do you think
the consequences would be of the SME carve-out?
From the regulator's perspective, I think
it's going to be
very challenging to hold those smaller
PCBU's to account.
Mm.
Because I think when it comes to investigating an incident where one of those
employees has been badly injured,
it will be an easy defense for the small
PCBU to say,
"I didn't determine this to be a critical risk because the likelihood of that
happening I determined to be low."
Mm.
"I actually look to the larger PCBU that I'm contracted to,
to manage that on my behalf."
But the challenge that will then be faced by the regulator is that the degree
of influence and control is harder to prove
for that other PCBU that wouldn't be the
employer of the person who's been injured.
Mm.
So I think it's going to make it more difficult and more
challenging for the regulator to hold
PCBU's to a consistent standard.
Mm. Thank you. Thank you for that. Grant.
Yeah. Excellent submission. Thank you.
I'm just curious, as the development of the
ACM codes of practice, right? Approved codes of
practice. Obviously, the ports have got
together and developed some codes themselves.
How do you suggest that we should go about that?
And the other key question is how do you keep them updated so that
they're not two years out of date and that sort of thing.
There's a lot of focus going on the opportunity here,
but how do we get it right?
Great question,
and it's absolutely key. The development of the
approved code of practice for the ports was a tripartite
process-
Mm
... that was led equally by the unions,
by the regulator, and by the ports and stevedoring companies
themselves.
The role of the
regulator was, and so you could say it was an industry-led
approved codes of practice.
Yep.
But the role of the regulator was key, and I think the role of the regulator going
forward will continue to be key.
Where we
need to make sure that partnership
works well in practice is in a project
management type capacity. So what are the steps
that we need to go through to ensure that the content meets the threshold for an
approved code of practice?
And also, as we go through,
how do we engage successfully across all the different
parties that will have a stake
in whatever the approved code of practice says needs to happen?
It is very difficult. In fact, I think for the port sector, it's fair to say it
would be impossible for the PCBU's in
isolation to achieve that goal. So industry-led,
yes, regulator-enabled is going to be key.
One of the things I'm doing at the moment is I'm on the steer co for
the GM Safety Forum, and I'm actually project managing the
development of a potential approved code of practice
for the management of critical risks.
Participating with WorkSafe through their pilot program
for
industry-led approved code of practice, and it's becoming
quickly evident that that partnership role is going to continue to be
key. Critical risks is something that affects all duty holders across
all industry sectors, more or less.
Very large number of stakeholders to engage with.
Industry by itself can't do that. It really needs the regulator act in
an enabling capacity for it to be successful.
And keeping them current, because that's the other part of the
question, because it's been highlighted by others that they can easily become out
of date, these codes of practice.
I think
that's true. I think that's an order of
magnitude... easier to
achieve. I think if we have the right
number of individuals representing industry
sectors tasked with, as part of their
industry-led status, tasked with
keeping abreast of what technology improvements, what changes to working
practices have been identified elsewhere that we could adopt easily,
keeping that under a regular review cycle, just as we're
currently doing with existing approved codes of practice and other
guidance.
I think that's relatively easy to achieve.
Yeah.
It's ensuring that we get the right product, the right
artifact, which makes sense to the smaller
organizations-
Yeah
... who don't have a safety professional like me advising
them.
That's the challenge that I think is problematic with the bill as it's currently
drafted.
Okay.
Thank you. Very helpful.
Mm.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thanks, Rob. Great submission, and thanks for your work at Ports of Auckland.
Yeah.
Thank you so much. All the best.
Okay. We are getting down to
our last two submissions.
First up is Mel Brown, personal submission.
Hi, Mel. Welcome to the subcommittee.
We've got your written submission
and have read it.
If you would turn on your camera and join us, that would be great.
How you doing, Mel?
Hey. Kia ora, team.
No, I'm going good. Thank you.
Good.
I'm very good.
Good to have you with us. You've got five minutes for your submission, and that
includes time for questions.
A choice one. Oh, first of all, Kia ora koutou katoa, ngā mihi nui
ake rangatira ma, tēnā ia tā. Kei te huhu mai tātou i
tēnei rā. Kei te tia mana.
Hei hariko ki te kite ki a koe. So that's just hello. And Mr.
Chair-
Yeah
... big hello to you, too.
So I think I'm one of the last, eh? So you saved the best for last.
Good on you guys.
So where do I start? So I guess I'm going to give you a frontline perspective of
this bill
from a worker perspective and from a health and safety rep.
So firstly, I was optimistic and I was hopeful that this bill would shift
and move the dial for health and safety performance in New Zealand.
However, after reviewing this bill,
I have to say I was quite underwhelmed, unimpressed, and
a little bit disappointed to be honest with you.
So I asked myself two questions when I was reading this, "Does
this bill
improve the overall performance of health and safety in Aotearoa, New Zealand?"
I'll say no.
"Does this bill help me as a health and safety rep
to improve the overall performance
of health and safety?" Again, I'll probably have to say no.
So for me, from a big picture perspective, this bill doesn't
represent the worker voice in any meaningful way.
And to me, that is a fundamental flaw within this document,
and I believe it is a missed opportunity.
So I couldn't believe it. I looked through it again, and I
control, find, search,
and tried to look for WEPA, Worker Engagement, Participation and
Representation. The word "worker" comes up 23 times.
"Engagement" comes up
zero times. "Participation" zero times.
"Representation" only appears once, and "representative" turns
up
twice in this whole document.
So to me, as a worker,
that speaks quite highly, and it's not just the numbers, it
actually highlights that there's a clear
measurable gap between legislation and the
workers.
Worker engagement, participation, and representation, they're not optional
extras. They are the backbone
to a well-functioning health and safety system.
And right now, that backbone is missing from this document,
and quite frankly, it's not good enough.
So
this new learning could be quite constructive.
Don't take it as a criticism, but more of an opportunity.
I'd rather you take it as an opportunity to backfill the worker voice
within this legislation, an opportunity to move forward
and beyond compliance on paper and improve the compliance in practice, an
opportunity to enable workers and their representatives, not just
expect them to carry out responsibility without influence.
Because where I stand,
workers don't need more theory.
They just need practical ways to be heard, involved, and effective in the systems
that are meant to keep them safe.
So I acknowledge that this bill reflects feedback from small businesses,
industries,
business leaders, landowners, et cetera,
and the concerns around, that they have with compliance burden,
uncertainty, and fear.
But I must ask you guys,
where's the worker voice in this conversation? What about their concerns?
What about their burdens? What about their fear, their uncertainty?
So in closing, if we're serious about improving the overall health and safety
outcomes of Aotearoa, then workers and representatives must be
visible, must be heard,
and WEPA must be embedded in legislation, not absent from it.
So, Mr. Chair, just a shout-out to you guys.
If you need any follow-up questions or any assistance
on this after,
I'm only happy to help because it looks like you guys need it.
So just, I'll pass it back to you guys. Kia ora.
Excellent. Thanks,
Mel. I think we've run out of time for questions, but your
point's very well made, so thank you.
No worries. Thank you.
Appreciate it.
All right. We've got Andrew Hayden as our personal
submitter, last one of the day.
Hello, Andrew. Welcome to the subcommittee.
You want to turn on your camera and join us?
Camera.
Can you see me?
No, not yet.
I've got a new computer, and it's
probably going to flummox me.
I can't see any...
That's all right, Andrew. Don't-
Oh, I've got it.
You have. Okay. All right. You're all good.
Good.
So welcome to the committee. We've got your submission and have read it, and
you've got five minutes, including questions.
Thank you. Having listened to a number of the other submissions
you've already heard, I've had to actually tick off a number of the points that I
would already want to make. So if this doesn't last very long, it's because
you've already heard a lot of the things that I would have to say.
But I've been in the health and safety domain for 48 years,
which is a hell of a long time in this very, very difficult domain.
But if we're looking at the problem of complexity,
it's only complex when you look at the whole domain, and
I don't blame anybody for not being able to get their head around what goes on in
the health and safety domain, especially for professionals.
But when you walk through the door of any sort of
PCBU, a small one or a medium-sized one, you're not dealing
with the complexity of the whole domain itself.
You're dealing with the complexities of that particular
business.
And if that business owner, who's probably built the business in many
cases themselves, they will be intimately aware of the
things that can knock their business sideways and potentially put them out of
business.
So the knowledge of exactly what kinds of
risks the PCBU's facing are probably well
known to the PCBU and/or the
employees themselves, who are the workers who do the work, who get exposed to
the risks.
So I think complexity is a furphy.
It seems complex when you stand back far enough and look at the entire domain and
what it applies to, everything from ergonomics to chemistry, to all sorts of
things. But a PCBU only has to get a fix on exactly what
is it that my operations are doing to create risks of
harm to the people that are exposed to my work, and that's not
an exhaustive list at all.
My son is actually a small panel beater.
He's got six employees and an apprentice.
And when I sat down with him the other day to help him get his head around this
whole thing,
I said, "Just manage risk."
So in 48 years of looking at every kind of
business you could imagine, from international corporations to tiny little
businesses in Dannyburg,
you can actually whittle it down to those three words, just manage
risk.
And if the PCBU, the owner of the business,
understood, I'm going to read Section 44 (4) , which
to me is the most critical piece of the entire legislation, "To gain an
understanding of the nature of the operations of the business or undertaking
of the PCBU and generally of the hazards and risks associated with
those operations." Not the whole domain.
They don't have to learn everything.
But if they sat with their workers for five minutes and said, "What could cause us
harm here, boys, or people?"
They would immediately have access to the things that go on in their
operation, and then what do we do to control it?
It really is that simple. It's shocking to
say that after 48 years, that's all I've learned.
But just manage risk. And it's not the risk of everything, it's the risk
of occupational harm to the people who we employ and the work that's being
done out in the field. There's another, quickly,
there's a thing that I don't know if I coined the phrase, safety in the
flow of work.
Workers are exposed to the risk of harm, and people
exposed to that work itself in the public domain.
But that's where risk needs to be addressed.
A critical risk can emerge out of a change in the weather or
a different team member joining the team halfway through a job.
It's in the flow of work, and this is something that the last speaker
pointed out. The workers need to be able to put their hand up and say, "Hang on a
second,
Mr. Boss.
Do you understand what's happening right here, right now that could cause us harm?"
And if they don't get access to be able to put their hand up and say, well, they do
have access under the law to say, "Hang on a second.
This needs to stop for a minute while we sort this mess out, otherwise
somebody will get harmed." The PCBU needs to listen and give them the
right to actually express their concerns about how to control the risk of harm
in that particular circumstance.
Critical risks are not immutable.
Critical risks can be infinitely well managed and not be a
critical risk because of the level of management going on.
But a small job can turn into a critical risk if somebody does something
foolish or inadvertent in a moment.
So that definition of critical risk is really
it's up to the PCBU to actually sit down with his
people and ask the question, "What could harm
us?" And then to go into the next stage, which is, are the
critical risks that we've identified together, are they being
effectively managed? That's the performance-based issue that
Robins came up with. Doesn't have to be consulted with
every consultant on the planet. It's just, what should we do
to control the risk of harm in our circumstances?
And I'd like the regulator to be able to say to every
PCBU out there, "Have you identified the risks of harm
to your people? And if not, it's a prima facie breach of Section
44 (4) ."
So let's get on with it. Let's sit down with everybody, come up with a simple
risk assessment process, and make sure everybody's doing it
reasonably diligently. And if not, I'm sorry,
we're going to kick you.
Andrew, thank you.
Clear submission. We've run out of time-
Yeah
... but you've made a useful submission on things that other people have not talked
about, so it's helpful. Thank you.
Thank you.
Great.
Okay. Hey, so colleagues,
that's it, and the clerk has informed me that
we will have time for consideration at the next full meeting of the
committee when we've got everybody there, including both
subcommittees. So
we're done.
Taryn, is there anything else
you want us to know about or discuss?
No, that's everything from me.
Cool. Thanks for all your support.
That's it. We're doing the private session, no private session. All that's good.
Perfect.
No